Categories
See Also
A category represents a type of information you want to store. For
example, if you want to track information about people, you would
use the Person/Company category for storing the data you enter
in Commence.
 
Categories consist of named fields. For example, the
Person/Company category consists of fields such as Name,
Address, and Phone. When you enter data into Commence, you
enter data into these fields just as you would enter data into a
paper form. There are different types of fields, similar to ones you
would find on a paper form. Unlike a paper form, Commence's
field types also give you:
 
a smart selection capability, called filtering, that lets you
set different types of selection criteria based on field type.
For example, if you are viewing the Notes/History
category, you can create a filter that displays only the
letters that were sent to the Acme Company during
February, 2006. (For more information, see Customize-
Filter View).
other special capabilities based on field type. For
example, you can dial a telephone field, perform
calculations on number fields, access external files, etc.
 
You use a screen called a detail form to enter data into
Commence. This form identifies the fields in an item that you
want displayed and lets you enter data values. You also use a
detail form when you edit data. Commence comes with at least
one pre-defined form for every category. You can edit these forms
at any time to change the arrangement of the fields, their fonts,
which fields appear in the form, and so on. You can also add
more forms for existing or new categories.
 
When you enter data into Commence using a form and save it,
you are creating an item. Before you can save an item, you must
enter a value in the name field. This special field type is the only
required field type in Commence. Commence uses it to locate
your data items, since every item in every category has one name
field value.
Views and View Types
See Also
A view displays the items stored in one or more categories.
Commence comes with one or more pre-defined views for each
category.
 
A view is made up of one or more fields, such as Name, Address,
Phone and Email. When you display a view, Commence gets the
field values for each item in the category and displays the values
in the view. Therefore, even if you defined a view weeks ago, it
will always display up-to-date data.
 
How the view appears and what special capabilities it has are
determined by the view type. Commence provides you with four
different view types:
 
Book Displays up to four fields with alphabetical book tabs for
quickly locating names.
Calendar Displays the names of items by day and time slot and
displays a busy bar that summarizes the entire day. Provides
navigational controls for moving quickly and easily to different
days. Lets you color code your appointments based on data in
the category, such as the type of appointment (meeting, phone
call, etc).
Gantt Chart Displays the names of items as a Gantt chart
showing the start and end dates of items in a category such as
Task. Lets you color code your tasks to indicate, for example, the
status of each task.
Grid Displays fields from one or more categories in a row/column
format. It can be used in two modes: read-only and update mode.
Document Displays a Web page as a view window on the
Commence desktop. The HTML view displays HTML content
directly from the Commence database or from a remote URL
address by hosting the Internet Explorer Web browser within
Commence.
Multi-View Displays a set of related views in one window frame.
The view is split to show the primary and secondary views.
Report Displays fields from one or more categories in a row-
column format. Optionally displays the total and averages of
certain field types. This is the default view type.
Report Viewer Displays data from your Commence database in
WYSIWYG format as a print preview. Data can be viewed,
printed, and exported to various file formats.
 
When you define a view, you always select a view type as well as
a category. Commence comes with a number of pre-defined
views. Some of these can be seen on the View bar to the left of
the Commence screen, and at the bottom of the View menu. The
entire set of pre-defined views in the active database can be seen
and opened using the View-Open/Manage Views command. From
this dialog box, you can add, edit, or delete a view at any time.
Editing the view lets you change the name of a view and decide
whether you want it to appear on the view bar and/or the Views
menu. You can also create a new view for displaying your data.
 
You can use the Customize-Sort View command to change the
sort order of the items displayed in report and Gantt view types.
 
You can view a subset of the items in a category by selecting
Customize-Filter View.
 
See the Customize menu topic for a description of these and
other commands that change the active view.
 
Changing the attributes of a view is temporary unless you save
the view definition changes using View-Save or View-Save View
As.
Connections
See Also
A connection ties together, or links, two related items. A
connection definition is a link between two categories. It creates
relationships between items in the same or different categories.
To add a connection definition to a database, select Customize ->
Database, followed by the Connection tab.
 
On a detail form, Commence provides you with a special three-
button control for each connection definition called a connection
control. This control lets you connect and disconnect items easily.
If you use this control to add a new item in the connected
category, Commence will automatically connect it to your source
item. Double clicking on the item name field in the control lets you
navigate to the detail form of the connected item.
 
You can easily add or rename a connection definition at any time
without affecting your data. You can also delete a connection
definition you don't want. Commence automatically updates your
detail forms when you add, edit and delete connection definitions.
It automatically updates saved views when you edit and delete
connection definitions.
Agents
See Also
An agent lets you instruct Commence to automatically perform
tasks for you.
 
A simple agent consists of a trigger and an action. The trigger
defines the event or time that will cause the agent to operate, and
the action determines what task will be performed. For example,
an agent could trigger every Friday at 9 am and print a list of
Calendar items for today.
 
There are four classes of triggers: timer, manual, data item and
external. A Timer trigger can be set to occur periodically or can
be set to occur only once at a given date and time. The manual
triggers (Menu Pick, Tool Bar Pick, and Keyboard Hotkey) fire
when you select the trigger from the Tools menu or the tool bar,
respectively. The Save Item trigger fires when you add and/or
edit an item, while the Item Alarm trigger fires based on the date
and time in an item. The external trigger (DDE) fires when
Commence receives a specified DDE message from another
Windows application.
 
Agents can also depend on one or two optional conditions. These
conditions can be used to further define the scope and operation
of the agent. For example, a condition can filter for a particular
subset of items in a category, such as all the Client type items in
the Person/Company category.
 
Up to four actions can be included in a single agent. You can
choose from four classes of actions: alerts, data
modification/display, Commence commands, and external
commands. The alerting actions that can be used as warnings,
reminders or notifications. The data modification/display actions
let you display views or let you add and edit data items. The
Commence command actions, such as Print Letter and Use
Telephone let you automatically perform certain menu commands
from within Commence. External command actions let you launch
an application or send a DDE message to another application.
 
See the Summary Tables, for a complete summary of all the
triggers, conditions, and actions supplied with Commence.
 
For detailed information about how to create new agents or
modify existing ones, see the Customize-Database-Agent
command.
Databases
See Also
A database is a set of categories, views and agents that you want
to store in Commence. Commence provides you with a pre-
defined database which is a set of simple categories, views and
agents that support customer service, project management and
contact management. This database has the same category, view
and agent definitions that you see when you use the Commence
tutorial. You can use the database as-is or you can customize it to
suit your needs. Or you can create a custom database from
scratch.
 
On your hard drive, each database is stored in its own directory
and, because Commence is based on a proprietary database,
you will see many separate files on disk within that directory.
Each file, no matter how small, serves a unique and important
purpose. Deleting or renaming Commence data files can result in
an unrecoverable loss of data.
 
Use the Open/Manage Database to open a different database; to
add, delete or rename databases; or to backup or restore a
database.
 
Regardless of the database you have open, you have access to
all of the capabilities that Commence provides: view types,
sorting, filtering, dialing, creating letters, etc.
 
You can move data between Commence databases or to other
database applications using the Tools-Export-By Category, Tools-
Export-By View, and Tools-Import commands. You can move
category, view, and agent definitions (and optionally, data)
between Commence databases using the Tools-Transfer Out and
Tools-Transfer In commands.
 
You can synchronize databases on different PCs using the Tools-
Sync Link Out and Tools-Sync Link In commands.
 
If you use more than one database, you will need to customize
each database environment separately. See the various
Preferences commands on the Customize menu for more
information.
Drag and Drop Operations
Some view types allow you to use your mouse to pick up an item
and perform one of the following drag and drop operations:
Print the item
Delete the item
Dial a phone number in the item
Send a letter using field values in the item
Move the item to a new date or time in a calendar view
Copy the item to another category
Reset the field values of an item based on the filter in the
destination view
You can also use drag and drop to re-structure filters and agents
by dragging the filter, agent condition, or agent action and then
dropping it to the new location.
 
To drag an item, click the left mouse button on the item and hold
the button down while you move the mouse pointer. The icon
changes to a sheet of paper (with a plus sign if it is a copy
operation) when you are over a "droppable" location. If you are
over an invalid location, the icon changes to a circle with a line
through it.
 
To drop the item, simply release the mouse button.
 
If the destination view is not visible, you can drop the selected
item on the magnet on the tool bar, open a different view, and
then drag the item from the magnet to its new location.
Copy an Item
You can copy an item by dragging the item to the magnet, then
dropping it back onto the same view, or by dragging an item to a
different view of the same category. To copy an item from one
category to another, drop the item on an open view for the other
category. If any field in both categories have identical field
names, those field values will also be copied to the new item. The
same applies to connections between the two categories.
Whenever possible, Commence changes the values of the new
item to match the values in the destination view's filter (if any).
Note: If you are dragging an item from a Calendar view, the
default drag and drop operation is move. You can force a copy
operation by holding down the Ctrl key while dragging the item.
If you drop the item on a calendar view, Commence will set the
date and, if possible, the start time, depending on where the item
was dropped.
Move an Item
You can move an item by holding down the Shift key while
dragging the item and dropping it onto a different view of the
same category. To move an item from one category to another,
drop the item on a view for a the other category. Move works the
same way as copy does with one major difference; the original
item is deleted after the move operation. Field values, connected
items and filters are handled in a move the same as with a copy.
 
Move an Item within the Calendar View
Since rescheduling appointments is the most common drag and
drop operation done in the Calendar view, move is the default
drag and drop operation. So is not necessary to hold down the
Shift key in this case. (See the note above for information about
forcing a copy operation.)
You can reschedule an item by dragging it to a new location on
the calendar or the mini-calendars. If you want to change
calendar dates or modes, you can drop the selected item on the
magnet on the command bar, change your date or mode, and
then drag your item from the magnet to its new date/time.
 
Reset Field Values Based on the Destination Filter
When you drop an item onto a filtered view, Commence tries to
make the item qualify for the view.
 
Note: If your filter specifies an indeterminate value, such as a
date range, Commence will not be able to set a value that
qualifies your item for the filter, so it will not appear in the view.
Caution: If an item seems to disappear after using drag and
drop, check the state of the Except checkbox in your filter. When
the except checkbox is used to invert a filter, drag and drop will
reset the field values of the item to match the filter but will
disregard the except setting. This will prevent the item from
appearing in the view.
Prefix Matching on the Name field
See Also
Prefix matching allows you to find a particular item in a long list of
items in a report view, Gantt chart view, grid view Book view, or
connection definition. For example: You are looking at a report
view of people from your Person/Company category. You need to
find the item for Paul Smith among the 30 other names starting
with Smith in the category. Type "smith, p" at your keyboard. The
characters typed are echoed in the status bar at the bottom of the
screen (these characters are the current prefix string).
 
As you type the prefix string, the highlight in the view moves to
the first item in the list whose Name field contains the prefix
string. Use the Crtl + N (hold down the Control key and then
press the "N" key) to move to the next prefix match. If there is no
match for a character that you type, you will hear a beep and the
character does not appear on the status bar.
 
Use the Backspace key to cancel the last character typed, and
return the highlight to the previous matching item (i.e., the first
item in the list that begins with the remaining characters on the
status bar).
 
The current prefix string remains in effect (and is displayed on the
status bar) until:
you press Esc.
you use one of the arrow or other navigation keys.
you activate another window.
you select a menu command.
a message box appears.
the active view is updated with a new or edited item via an
agent, a DDE message, or, for a client database, a
synchronization with the Server database.
 
If you are searching through a connection control (either the list of
connected items or the list of all items in the connected category),
then choosing another connection control also cancels the current
prefix string.
Note: In connection controls only, press Ctrl + Spacebar to
insert a space in the current prefix matching string.
Natural Language Dates and Times Commence
interprets date and time values entered in plain
English words (e.g., tomorrow, noon).
 
Select a topic below to see a description of the valid formats for
each type of field:
Natural Language Dates for the Date Field
Natural Language Times for the Time Field
Add a Command Line Option
See Also
Command line options are useful if you want to control how
Commence starts up. For example, if you always want to open
the same database, you can use the /DATABASE= option, or if
you run multiple instances of Commence and do not want to be
bothered with the message that there is already a copy running
message, you can use the /QUIET option.
 
To add a command line option, follow the steps below:
 
If you start Commence with an icon on the desktop:
1. Single click on the icon to highlight it.
2. Right click the icon to bring up the menu.
3. Select Properties.
4. Select the Shortcut tab.
5. At the end of the text displayed in the Target: box, add a
space, then the command line option.
6. Select OK.
 
If you start Commence with a menu selection from the Start
menu:
1. Open the Start menu.
2. Select Settings.
3. Select Taskbar.
4. Select the Start Menu Programs tab.
5. Select the Advanced button.
6. In Explorer, find the Commence program menu item.
7. With the menu item highlighted, right click the selection to
bring up the menu.
8. Select Properties.
9. Select the Shortcut tab.
10. At the end of the text displayed in the Target: box, add a
space, then the command line option
11. Select OK and close all other dialog boxes.
Backup a Commence Database
See Also
You should regularly backup (make a copy) of your
Commence database. This is incase you encounter
problems with your PC or Commence in which your must
recover your data. You can also schedule regular backups
using an agent.
 
To backup a database:
1. Click the Commence Application button, and select
Open/Manage Database.
2. Highlight the database you wish to backup.
3. Select the Backup button.
4. Select the path and the filename you wish to use for
the backup file. The default extension is .XFR. Note: If
the database is large and you wish to backup to floppy,
Commence will span the backup over multiple
diskettes.
5. Select Save.
Restore a Commence Database
See Also
If you have hard drive problems or have had problems with
your Commence database, it may be necessary to restore
your database from a backup made earlier.
 
NOTE: You should regularly backup (make a copy) of your
Commence database. This is incase you encounter
problems with your PC or Commence in which your must
recover your data. You can also schedule regular backups
using an agent.
 
To restore a database:
1. Open a database other than the one you want to
restore to. You cannot restore to the open database.
2. Select Open/Manage Database.
3. Highlight the database you wish to restore to. If you
want to restore to a new database, you will need to
create it by selecting the Add button.
4. Select the Restore button.
5. If the highlighted database is already populated, a
restore will totally delete all files in that directory. This
cannot be reversed. Select Yes if this is what you want
to do, otherwise, select No and then select a different
database to restore to or add a new one.
6. Select the path and the filename of the file you wish to
restore. The default extension is .XFR.
7. Select Open.
8. If the database is being restored from diskette and it
occupies more than one, you will be prompted when to
insert the next diskette.
Open a Database
 
Follow the steps below to open a Commence database.
 
1. Select the Commence Application button, then choose
Open/Manage Database.
2. Highlight the database you wish to open.
3. Select the Open button.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a database name to
open it without selecting the Open button.
Add a Database
 
Follow the steps below to add a Commence database:
 
1. Select the Commence Application button, then choose
Open/Manage Database.
2. Select the Add button.
3. Enter the Name of the database you wish to add. The
name is limited to 50 characters.
4. Enter the path to the database. The path can be an
existing Commence database that is no longer
referenced, an existing directory, or a directory that
does not exist yet.
5. Select Save. If the directory does not exist,
Commence will ask you if you want to create it.
Edit a Database
 
Follow the steps below to edit a Commence database.
 
1. Select the Commence Application button, then choose
Open/Manage Database.
2. Highlight the database you wish to edit.
3. Select the Edit button.
4. Change the Name of the database. Only the Name
can be changed. If you need to change the path, you
should backup the database, add a new database,
then restore into the new database.
Delete a Database
 
Follow the steps below to delete a Commence database.
 
1. Select the Commence Application button, then choose
Open/Manage Database.
2. Highlight the database you wish to delete.
3. Select the Delete button.
4. When prompted “Are you sure?”, select Yes.
5. When prompted for confirmation of deletion of all files
and folders in the database directory, type in “Yes” and
then the OK button.
 
You cannot delete the active database. Commence will
also not let you delete a database if it is the only database
defined.
 
Caution: When you delete a database, Commence gives
prompts you for confirmation of the deletion. If you select
Yes, Commence will warn you that all files and folders
contained in the selected database will be deleted. If you
wish to proceed, type “yes” then select the OK button. If
you do not wish to continue, select the Cancel button.
After the files are deleted, there is no way of recovering
them.
Adding a Field to a Category
Sometimes you want to track some additional information for a
category. For example, you may want to keep track of who you
sent a card to during the holidays. To do this, you could add a
check box field called Sent Card. When you send a card to the
person, you would then check the Sent Card check box.
To add a field to a category:
1. Select Customize-Database select the Category tab. Highlight
the name of the category you wish to edit and click on the Edit
button. This will display the Category Definition dialog box.
2. Select the Add button.
3. Enter a name for the field you wish to add in the Field Label
text box. This name is limited to 20 characters and it cannot
be the same name as any other existing fields.
4. Select a Field Type for the field. The following field types are
available in Commence. To see a definition of the field, select
the field type name below.
Calculation
Check Box
Data File
Date
E-Mail
Excel Cell
Image
Number
Selection
Sequence Number
Telephone
Text
Time
URL (Internet)
 
5. To specify a value to automatically appear when you add an
item to the category, put a default value in the Default text
box. For example, if you add a Date field, you may want the
default value to be today's date. To do this, enter Today in the
default value. To have a Check Box field value appear as
checked, set the default value to checked.
Note: Not all fields are capable of having default values.
6. If you entered a date field, you have the option of making it a
Recurring Date Field. Checking this box will allow you to add
a group of items that occur at regular intervals. For example, a
staff meeting that occurs every Monday.
7. To ensure that a field always has a value, check the
Mandatory Field check box. Commence will display an error
message if you save an item without a value for this field. You
will not be able to save the item until you enter a value for all
mandatory fields.
8. When all the options are set the way you wish, select OK. For
more information of field specific options, select a field type
then press F1.
9. To add another field, continue from step 3.
10. When you are done adding fields, select the Save button and
all your changes will be saved. The time required to save the
category depends on the number of items you have in the
category.
11. To see the changes you have made, select the
mage/additem_shg.gif
button on the tool bar You will see the new fields at the bottom
of the item detail form. To move the new field to another
position on the form, , use the Customize-Design View
command, while the detail form is open. This will display the
Design Detail Form dialog box.
Editing a Field in a Category
To change a field's name or options::
Note: When editing a field, you can only change the field's name
and options; you cannot change the field's type.
 
1. Select Customize-Database. and click on the Category tab.
Highlight the name of the category you wish to edit and click
on the Edit button. This will display the Category Definition
dialog box.
2. Highlight the field you wish to edit in the Fields list box.
3. Select the Edit button.
4. Make the changes to the field label and field options as
needed. Remember, the field type cannot be changed.
Note: If you change the Total Size of a text field to a smaller
size, any existing items that have text in this field may lose
some data. The field will be reduced to the new size. Also, any
changes made to radio group will cause the existing items
radio buttons to change to the new values. Lastly, if any letter
template references a field whose name has been changed,
Commence will not automatically update it. You must edit the
letter template and update the field code to use the new field
name.
5. Select OK when you are done editing the field.
6. To edit more fields, continue from step 3.
7. When you are done editing fields, select the Save button and
all your changes will be saved. The time required to save the
category depends on the number of items you have in the
category.
Customizing a Detail Form
You can customize the detail form by:
* Specifying individual field attributes such as font, size, label
alignment, and color.
* Arranging the position of the fields on the screen by manually
moving fields.
* Changing the color of the form's background.
* Add graphics and text to the form.
* Remove fields from the form.
* Add form tabs and distribute the fields across multiple pages.
 
To arrange a detail form, do the following:
1. Open a view of the category for which you wish to edit the
detail form. For help, see Opening a View.
2. Select Edit-Add Item from the menu bar.
3. A form is displayed. Select the mage/design_shg.gif
button from the tool bar or the Customize-Design View
command.
4. The Detail Form Design dialog box is displayed. For more
information, see Designing Detail Forms or refer to Chapter 5
of the Commence User’s Guide.
5. Select File-Save to save your changes when you are done
editing the form.
Select the File-Exit to cancel all the changes you have made.
6. You are returned to the open detail form in Commence. Notice
that the new form arrangement is in effect. Select the Cancel
button on the form toolbar to return to the Commence work
area.
Working with Views
See Also
A view is a formatted display of category data. You create a view
by combining a category and a view type. The format of the view
is determined by the view layout.
To see how to work with views, select one of the following topics:
Opening a View
Saving a View
Displaying a field that is not in a View
Changing the fonts used in a Report
Sorting a View
Filtering a View
Link Views
Opening a View
If the view is on the view bar, the vertical bar to the left of
the Commence screen:
1. Locate the view you wish to open. If necessary, use the
up and down arrows at the top of the view bar to scroll
the buttons.
2. Left click on the view you wish to open.
Note: If you do not have a mouse, you cannot access any
of the views on the view bar.
 
If the view is on the View menu:
1. Select the View menu.
2. Select the view you wish to open.
 
If you believe the view to be saved, but it is not on the
view bar or View menu, select the View-Open/Manage
Views command. This will display a list of all saved views.
 
If the view you are looking for doesn't exist:
1. Select the View-Open/Manage Views command from
the menu bar. The Open/Manage View dialog box is
displayed. Select the Create New button.
2. In the Category: list box, highlight the name of the
category you wish to view.
3. In the View As radio group, select the view type to use.
For more information on view types, see Views and
View Types.
4. If you choose to use the Report view type, you have a
choice of displaying all the fields in the category or just
the Name field.
5. Select the View button.
Note: This view is just temporary. If you close the view
without saving it, the view will be lost. To make the view
permanent, save the view with View-Save View or
select Yes when Commence asks to save the view.
Saving Changes to a View
If you have made changes to a view and you want this
view to always open with these changes, you must save
the view.
To save changes to a view, either:
Select View-Save View. The view will be saved under the
original name.
Or select Yes when Commence asks to save changes to
the view.
Displaying a Field that is not in a View
From a Report/Grid View
From a Book View
From a Calendar View
From a Gantt View
Changing the fonts used in a Report/Grid View
To change the font used by a field in a report or grid view:
1. With the view open and active, select Customize-
Design View and select the Fields tab.
2. Highlight the field you wish to change in the Fields in
Report list box. If the field you wish to change is not in
the view, see Displaying a Field that is not in a View.
3. Select the Field Options button. This will display the
Set Report Field Options dialog box
4. Select the font, font size, and any other options you
want.
5. Select OK.
6. Repeat from step 2 for each field you wish to change.
7. Select OK in the Fields tab dialog box when you are
finished with your changes.
Note: This change is just temporary. If you close the view
without saving it, the change will be lost. To make the
changes permanent, save the view with View-Save
View or select Yes when Commence asks to save
changes to the view.
To change the font of every field displayed in a view one
step:
1. With the view open and active, select Customize-
Design View and select the Fonts tab.
2. Select the font and font size you want and select
Change All.
3. Select OK in the Fonts tab dialog box when you are
finished with your changes.
Sorting a View
The views that can be sorted are Report Views, Grid
VIews and Gantt Views.
1. Select the Customize-Sort View command.
2. Select the field to sort on from the Primary Field drop-
down list box
Note: You cannot sort on a field other than the Name field
of a connecting category.
3. Select an Ascending or Descending sort by selecting
the appropriate radio button.
4. If more than 1 item has the same value for the Primary
Field, you may wish to select a secondary sort field. To
do this, select a field from the Secondary Field drop-
down list box and select the Ascending or
Descending radio button.
5. Continue until you have set all the desired sort fields.
6. Select OK and the view will be sorted.
Note: When sorting on selection fields, the order is not
necessarily in alphabetic order. The sort is
accomplished using the order of the selection field
values.
Note: The sort is only temporary. If you close the view
without saving it, the sort will be lost. To make the sort
order permanent, save the view with View-Save View or
select Yes when Commence asks to save changes to
the view.
Filtering a View
A filter will select a subset of items for the active category
and display them in the active view. Note that a filter is
temporary. Once the view is closed, the filter is gone. To
make the filter a permanent part of the view, you must
save the view using View-Save View.
To filter a view, see:
Filtering on a Single Field Value
Filtering on More than One Field
Filtering on a Date Range
Finding Items with Blank Fields
 
 
 
 
Customize-Link Views
View Linking is a way to link two open views by a date, date
range, or by the highlighted item. For example, using View Link,
you can link your To-Dos view with the calendar. If your calendar
is currently displaying the current week, your To-Dos view will
also display the To-Dos for the current week. If you then change
the display mode of your calendar to display the current month,
the To-Dos view will change to show the To-Dos for the current
month. Another example is that you can link your
People/Company view to a view of Notes. When you change the
selected contact, you can see the notes referring to that contact.
 
To use View Link:
 
1. 
Open the two views you want to link.
2. 
Select Customize-Link Views. Select what type of View Link
you want to establish:
Selected Date in current Calendar view:
Will use a calendar view as the primary view to drive the
secondary view.
The secondary view will become filtered on the selected
date in the active calendar view. The secondary view
must have a Date field.
Date Range of current Calendar view:
Will use a calendar view as the primary view to drive the
secondary view.
The secondary view will become filtered on the date
range displayed in the active calendar view. (If only one
day is displayed (in day mode), the range is only one
day. If a month is displayed (in month mode), the range
is the whole month). The secondary view must have a
Date field.
Connection to highlighted item:
Will cause the selected primary view to drive the
secondary view. There must be a connection between
the categories used in the primary and secondary view.
The secondary view will display items connected to the
highlighted item in the primary view.
3. 
Select the Primary view. This is the view that will drive the
other view. For example, if linking views to show People
who are connected to a highlighted Company, this would
be the Company view.
4. 
Select the Secondary view. This is the view that will show
the filtered set of items. For example, if linking views to
show People who are connected to a highlighted
Company, this would be the view of People.
5. 
Select the Date Field or Connection Field to use in the View
Link.
6. 
When completed, select Save. The two views will be linked.
Note: A View Link is actually a filter on the secondary view. To
see how the filter is setup, make the secondary view active, then
select Customize-Filter View. Also, since View Link is a filter, it is
only temporary. You must save the view to save the Link.
 
 
 
 
Searching for Text in Multiple Fields and Across
Multiple Categories
See Also
Commence provides a global search feature to find all items
across all categories that contain or exactly match a particular
text string. Using global search, you can quickly locate all
pertinent information for an important meeting, find all the notes,
phone calls, etc., that refer to a particular contact or topic, display
all items from all categories with a certain date or time, and more.
 
Global search lets you scan all or part of a Commence database
for items containing a specified text string or wildcard pattern. If
you want, you can restrict the search to a particular set of
categories.
 
To perform a global search:
1. Select the Tools-Global Search command from the menu bar.
The Global Search dialog box is displayed.
2. Type the text you want to search for in the Search Text box.
3. Use the Match drop-down list to select whether you want to do
a fuzzy search or an exact one. Fuzzy searches are forgiving
of misspellings.
4. To restrict the search to exactly match the case (upper or
lowercase) of the search text, turn on the Match Case check
box.
5. Commence searches all categories by default. To exclude
categories from the search, use the Categories button.
6 Select the Start Search button to start the search. Items are
displayed in a list box as they are found. The Search Status
will be set to SEARCH COMPLETE when the search has
finished.
Finding Items in a Large List
See Also
You can use prefix matching to find a particular item in a long list
of items in a report view, Gantt chart view, Book view, or
connection control.
 
1. Display the view or connection control in which you want to
find the item. For help, see Opening a View.
2. Start typing the name of the item you want to find. As you type
the prefix string, the highlight in the view moves to the first
item in the list whose name contains the prefix string. The
prefix string also appears in the status bar. If there is more
than one item with the same string use Ctrl + N to move to the
next prefix match. If there is no match for a character that you
type, you will hear a beep
Copying an Item
Once data has been entered, you may need similar
information in a different item. You can copy any item to a
new item. This allows you to duplicate data into a new item
without retyping the information.
You can copy an item by dragging the item and dropping it
on a view. To copy an item from one category to another,
drop the item on a view for the other category. The values
in fields having identical names in the source and
destination fields are copied. For more information, see
Drag and Drop.
 
To copy an item within the same category:
1. Open the view where the item is stored. For more
information, see Opening a View.
2. Highlight the item or display it's form by double clicking
on the item name.
3. Select the Edit-Copy Item command.
4. A form appears for the active category. This form
contains the information from the existing item.
Change any field values you wish for the new item.
The original item will remain unchanged.
5. Select the Save button.
Designing a Custom Paper Layout
The Page Setup command is used to create new paper layouts.
With this command you can also edit, copy, and delete any paper
layout. While Commence comes with a variety of paper layouts
already installed, you may want to define a custom paper layout
to print information from Commence on a custom form (such as
an envelope or label form) and it to the choices presented in the
Paper list box of the Page Setup dialog box.
 
Commence's paper layouts allow you to print information from
your Commence database on virtually any form that can fit in
your printer. And you can do it just by entering the various
dimensions of the paper you are going to use.
 
To design a paper layout and enter it into Commence:
 
1. Measure the characteristics of the paper you want to use, as
shown in the diagram below.
 
image/paperlay_shg.gif
 
The example above shows a paper layout with 2 columns and 6
rows (12 regions). The internal margin defined for all regions
reduces the printed area in each region to the size of the
gray box shown in each region. If no internal margins are
chosen, the entire region area is used for printing.
Internal margins are particularly useful for labels that have
rounded corners, that do not meet at their edges, or that
have shipping holes.
2. Select the Home-Page Setup command.
3. Select the Add button on the Page Setup dialog box.
4. In the Paper list box, select the size of the paper you will use
in the printer when using this paper layout. You can choose
from among Commence's many pre-defined paper sizes
(which set the page height and width for you), or select
Custom to specify your own page height and width.
5. Enter the measurements from Step 1 into the appropriate
boxes on the Add Paper Layout dialog box. Make sure the
Sample shown matches your specifications.
6. Type a name for the layout into the Layout Name text box.
7. Select Save.
 
To use the new layout:
1. Open a view of the information you want to print using the
new page layout.
2. Use the Home-Printer Setup command to verify that the
current printer is the one you want to use.
3. Select Home-Print.
4. On the Print dialog box displayed, select the Layout Name
(see Step 6, above) that you gave the new paper layout from
the Paper list box. Choose other options as appropriate.
5. Make sure that you have the proper form(s) loaded into your
printer and that your printer is turned on. Select OK.
The information in the active view is printed using the new
paper layout.
Using Commence's Phone Features
Commence will dial phone numbers for you if you have Windows
Telephony (TAPI) installed and setup with a supported device
such as a modem.
The following How Do I? topics are available for Commence's
Phone Features:
Dialing a Telephone Number
Logging a Phone Call
The Ribbon
The Ribbon (previously the menu bar) is the row of menu
command buttons above the Commence work area just beneath
the title bar. The ribbon menu is always displayed; it can be
minimized to save space on the desktop. This collapses the
ribbon to show just the top-level menu commands. (See Edit-
Preferences-Tool Bars)
 
 
Toolbar
The Home page of the Ribbon features a Toolbar group of
buttons. These buttons are reserved for commonly used
Commence menu commands. The menu commands are
described below. Click each command for additional information.
 
[Drag and Drop] The first slot of the tool bar is not a button but a
place holder for drag and drop items.
 
Design View
Sort View
Filter View
Global Search
Add ? Item
Add Item
Delete Item
Dial Phone
Send Letter
Message Log
 
Agent Toolbar
Also on the Home page of the Ribbon is an Agent Toolbar group
of buttons. These buttons are reserved for user-created agent
buttons that have a Tool Bar Pick Trigger.
 
When creating the agent, you can choose a numbered position to
arrange the button in that specific position. Agent buttons are
shown in numerical order by position. A group can contain as few
as one agent, or up to 15 agents with consecutive position
numbers.
 
Quick Access Toolbar
The Quick access toolbar is a customizable row of buttons above
the Commence ribbon and just beneath the title bar.
 
The Quick access toolbar can be shown either above or below
the Ribbon. To switch positions, click the drop-down arrow at the
end of the Quick access toolbar, and choose 'Show Below the
Ribbon' or 'Show Above the Ribbon'.
 
Print
The Print button is shown on the Quick access toolbar by default.
This button can be hidden without being removed. Click the drop-
down arrow at the end of the toolbar, then remove the checkmark
next to 'Print'.
 
Add Buttons
To add a new button, right-click on any object in the Ribbon, then
choose 'Add to Quick Access Toolbar'. Buttons will be shown in
the order in which they were added.
 
To add a view to the quick access toolbar, first the view must be
added to the Ribbon. To do this,
1. Open the view.
2. Select Open/Manage Views from the View menu.
3. Click Edit on this screen to change the display settings for
the active view. If the View is not currently on the Ribbon,
then 'Display on View Menu for Desktop:' is set to (none).
Change this to (all).
4. On the Home menu, click the arrow in the Launch group for
Views.
5. Find your view; it will be listed in alphabetical order.
6. Right-click on the view name, then choose 'Add to Quick
Access Toolbar'. The view name will now appear in the Quick
access toolbar for all desktops.
Remove Buttons
To remove a button, right-click on the button in the Quick access
toolbar, then choose 'Remove from Quick Access Toolbar'.
 
 
Open/Manage Database
Selecting the Commence Application button, then choosing
Open/Manage Database displays the Open/Manage Database
dialog box. With this command, you can:
Open a different database
Add a new database
Edit an exiting database to determine its location or change
the database name
Backup a database
Restore from a backup of a Commence database.
 
A database consists of the information you enter into categories,
as well as the categories, views, agents, preferences, and other
features that you use.
 
ACTIVE DATABASE
The database that was open when you last exited Commence is
opened automatically when you start Commence; it is called the
active database. To access the data contained in another defined
database, you must open that database. When you do, the
previously open database will be closed automatically. Its data is
inaccessible until you open it again.
 
PASSWORD PROTECTED DATABASES
If you attempt to open a password-protected database, the
Database Password dialog box is displayed. To access the
database enter the password in the Password text box and
select OK. When you enter the correct password, the database is
opened. For more information on facilities to protect your data
from unauthorized access, see Database Protection.
 
 
ADDING DATABASES
You may want to create your own databases to keep certain data
separate or to create a unique application database. You can
define up to 1000 Commence databases. Views, categories,
agents, preferences, etc. defined in a particular database are
accessible only when that database is open. To open multiple
databases at the same time, you will need to run multiple copies
of Commence.
 
EDITING DATABASES
You may also want to change the name of an existing database,
or delete old databases no longer in use. The only thing you
cannot change once a database is created is the Windows folder
in which it resides.
 
The databases delivered with Commence reside in separate
directories under the Application Data Directory by default.
Their locations are selectable on installation.
 
TUTORIAL DATABASE
Maintaining data in separate databases protects data in one
database from changes you make in another. For example, if you
use the tutorial database included with Commence, you will
notice that none of the changes you make while in the tutorial
affect the data or other features in any other database. That's
because the tutorial data is contained in a separate database.
 
Note, however, that the tutorial database is not listed in the
Open/Manage Database dialog box. Also the Open/Manage
Database command is not available while you are using the
tutorial database. This is because entering tutorial mode entails
setting up an entire environment for your practice work as well as
switching to another database. (See Help-Tutorial Database for
more information about the tutorial database.)
Exit
See Also
Use this command to exit Commence and return to Windows.
Selecting the Commence Application button, then choose Exit.
This is equivalent to using the Control Menu Box to close the
Commence window.
 
If there are any currently open views, Commence checks to see if
any of them are new, unsaved views, or saved views that have
been changed and not saved.
 
If a changed view is a saved view, Commence checks your view
preferences to determine what changes you want saved and
whether to save the specified changes automatically (i.e., silently)
or to display the Save View dialog box. If your preferences are set
to Ask and then save View, Commence will ask if you want to
save the view. If you respond by selecting the Yes button, the
Save View dialog box is displayed with the name of the view filled
into the Name text box. You can save the changed view under its
own name, or type in another name.
 
If a changed view is a new unsaved view, Commence checks
your View Preferences. If the New View check box is checked,
Commence will ask if you want to save the view. If you respond
by selecting the Yes button, Commence will display the Save
View dialog box for you to type a name for the view and select
the Save button to save the view. All properties of the view are
saved.
 
 
 
 
Home-Workgroup Sync
Choosing this menu command causes the client database to
immediately synchronize any changes with the server database,
and updates your client database with any changes from the
server database. This command allows you to override the
automatic synchronization that occurs periodically, in cases
where you need to quickly retrieve any changes to the shared
database.
This command is useful when your database contains changes
that you want to share immediately with another user or if the
server contains changes that you need quickly. For example, if
you are using a client database stored on a notebook computer
and you are leaving the office, you can use the Workgroup Sync
command to retrieve the latest changes to the shared database
before disconnecting from the network.
This command is also useful when a client database is connected
to the network by a remote connection, such as remote access
software connected to the network via a modem. This command
can be used to quickly retrieve changes to the shared database
while the connection is available, reducing the amount of time
that the remote connection must be kept open.
 
 
 
 
Message Log This command displays a log of the
messages that have been posted to the status bar.
You can display this log by selecting the Message
Log command or selecting the equivalent toolbar
button. These messages include informational
messages displayed by commands and agents as
they execute that will help you diagnose and correct
problems encountered in Commence.
 
If the currently open database is a shared database and there is a
synchronization problem, the Message Log icon will change color
or shade. If this happens, you should check the Message Log to
find out what is wrong.
 
When you select Message Log, Commence displays the Message
Log dialog box. The Message Log icon is also included on the
Home ribbon menu and also the Help menu for convenience, and
may be added to the Quick Access Toolbar to ensure the icon is
visible at all times.
Send Letter
See Also
Use this command on the Home tool bar to create a letter for the
currently highlighted item (typically this is a person in one of your
person views) or for the active view. You can use any word
processor installed on your system to create your letter, as long
as you make sure that your letter preferences are set correctly
and the word processor has been configured for use with
Commence (see Word Processors for information).
 
When you select Send Letter, Commence displays the Send
Letter dialog box, from which you select the template for your
letter.
Shortcut: Drag an item in a view to the Letter button on the tool
bar to create a letter for the item.
 
You pick an already defined letter template (some are included
with Commence) as the model for the new letter. Based on the
contents of the template, field values from the highlighted item
are merged into the new letter. (See Customize-Database-Letter
Template for details on letter templates.)
 
After you select a template, you can chose to either print the
letter or preview the letter in your word processor (so you can
modify the letter before you print it or save it to a file).
 
If you get any error messages when attempting to send a
formatted letter from Commence, make sure you have followed all
the instructions for Configuring Your Word Processor for Use with
Commence
Dial Phone
See Also
Use this command on the Home tool bar, to dial a phone number
displayed by the active view or item detail. The Dial Phone
command is unavailable unless there is a telephone field present
in the active view or detail form.
 
If there is more than one phone number in the active view or item
detail, Commence will display the Select Telephone Number
dialog box from which you select the number you want.
 
Shortcut: Double click the left mouse button on a telephone field
in an item detail to dial the number in the field without selecting
Dial Phone. You can also drag an item in a view to the Dial
button on the tool bar to dial the items phone number. You can
also highlight a telephone number in a text field and then select
the Dial button on the tool bar.
 
If you have a dialing device such as a modem attached and have
correctly configured your Dialer Preferences, Commence will
transmit the phone number to your dialing device and display the
Commence Dialing dialog box. This dialog box displays the
number being dialed. It also displays a Hang Up button and a
Change Options button. The Hang Up button allows you to
terminate the dialing by disconnecting the modem. The Change
Options button allows you to change the dialing options via TAPI.
 
Note: You cannot select a phone number in a connected field
from a report view for dialing.
Send
Use this command to export the data in the active view to a
HyperText Markup Language (HTML) file. If there is a filter on the
view, only the items and fields displayed in the view will be
included in the HTML file. This command is available only if there
is an active view in calendar or report format.
 
Perform the following steps to save an HTML file:
1. Open a calendar or report view. If the view is not currently in
calendar or report format, use the View-View As command to
change the view type to either Calendar or Report.
2. Select the Send command from the menu bar to launch your
e-mail program. If prompted, enter your e-mail login or profile
information.
3. The active view will be converted to an HTML file and
attached to the e-mail message.
4. The subject of the e-mail message will automatically be filled
with the View Name from Commence.
5. Type the e-mail address of the recipient or select an e-mail
address from the Address Book of your e-mail program. The
names of all your contacts from Commence can be made
available to MAPI address books. For details on how to set
up a Commence Address Book in your e-mail program, see
the topic titled Configuring MS Outlook Address Book.
6. You may also click anywhere above or below the attached
HTML view and press Enter on your keyboard to insert a
blank line. Type any additional comments or other
information as needed in the body of the e-mail message.
7. Send the e-mail as you normally would when you are finished
previewing the message.
Print
See Also
Use this command to print the active view or the currently
displayed item detail. You can select Print from the Home menu
bar, press CTRL + P, or select the print button from the tool bar to
invoke this command.
 
Selecting Print from the Home menu bar, or selecting the print
button from the command bar, or dragging an item in a view to
the print button, displays a dialog box specific to the view type of
the view to be printed; there is also a specific dialog box for
printing item details.
 
After choosing appropriate options from the dialog box displayed
and selecting the OK button, Commence displays a window that
tells you the currently printing page number and the view or item
detail title. The page number restarts at 1 for each item detail
printed, if you choose to print item details. There is a Cancel
button in this window that you can select to cancel the job in
progress.
 
You can also "drag and drop" an item from the active view to the
Print button on the command bar. To do this from any view, click
and hold down the left mouse button on the item, move the
mouse pointer to the Print button, and release the mouse button.
Printer Setup
Use this command to choose printer options (such as available
fonts and page orientation) and select the default printer for
printed output.
 
Selecting Printer Setup from the Home menu bar displays the
Printer Setup dialog box.
 
 
 
 
 
Print Preview
See Also
The Print Preview option is used to see how a printout will look
prior to actually printing it out. This is an invaluable tool when
designing reports and other printed materials. By looking at the
Print Preview for a view, it can be determined if all information will
fit on a single page, if the information appears crowded, or if there
is room for additional information that may be desired to be
included
 
 
 
 
Page Setup
See Also
Use this command to create, edit, copy, and delete paper layouts
for use with the Print command. You can also associate a specific
printer with each paper layout; this printer will be selected
whenever that paper layout is used.
 
A paper layout in Commence is a flexible template for printing
views and item details. It specifies the dimensions of a paper form
you want to use in your printer and the printable area of the form.
When you print information from Commence, the paper layout lets
you specify exactly where you want view and item detail
information to go on the paper. Commence includes many pre-
defined paper layouts, which are suitable for various purposes.
These pre-defined paper layouts may also be edited and saved
under new names.
 
Selecting the Page Setup command from the Home menu bar
displays the Page Setup dialog box.
Launching Views from the Ribbon menu
A numbered list of saved views appears at the bottom of the
Home menu. Selecting a numbered view from the list opens the
chosen view.
 
You can place a view's name on the Home menu by selecting the
View-Open/Manage Views command. Highlight the name of the
view you want to place on the Home menu and click on Edit.
Mark the Display on Menu Bar check box.
 
The ability to place the names of up to 40 of your most frequently
used views on the Views menu is provided as a convenient
alternative to using the View-Open/Manage Views command.
Menu Pick Agents-1, 2, 3...
See Also
This topic describes the menu pick and tool bar pick agents in
Commence.
Menu Pick Agents
If you define and activate an agent with a menu pick trigger, the
menu pick will be added to the bottom of the Agent tab.
 
All active menu pick triggers are listed on the Tools menu. If a
menu pick trigger is associated with a particular category, then it
will be grayed out unless a view of that category is currently
active.
 
If you move the mouse over an agent menu pick, the status bar
will display the help message (if it exists) that was defined for the
trigger. When you deactivate an agent with a menu pick trigger,
its menu pick is removed from the menu.
 
Tool Bar Pick Agents
If you define and activate an agent with a tool bar pick trigger, a
user-selected button will be added to the Tool bar.
 
Buttons for all active tool bar pick agents are displayed on the
right side of the tool bar. If you move the mouse over an agent
tool bar pick, the status bar will display the help message (if it
exists) that was defined for the trigger. When you deactivate an
agent with a tool bar pick trigger, its button is removed from the
tool bar.
 
You can add your own buttons to the tool bar by defining an agent
with a Tool Bar trigger.
Edit-Cut
See Also
Use the Edit-Cut command (or press shift+delete) to delete
highlighted data and place a copy on the Windows Clipboard.
This command can be used to delete the highlighted item in the
active category from the database. It can also be used to delete
data from an individual field in an item detail.
 
This command is particularly useful for moving field values
between item details of items in the same or different views.
 
Typically, you use the Edit-Cut command to delete data from a
field that you want to move to another field. For items, only a
subset of the item's fields are copied to the Clipboard (see
below); any other data in the item is lost.
 
Display an item detail or view and highlight the field data or item
that you want to delete. Then, select the Edit-Cut command from
the menu bar.
 
For fields, only the visibly highlighted text is deleted and placed
on the Clipboard.
 
For items, the entire item is deleted from the Commence
database, regardless of how much of the item is actually visible in
the active view. The fields copied to the Clipboard depend on the
view type and category, as follows:
 
Book All fields in the view (see Customize-Design View)
Calendar Start time field for view (see Customize-Design
View), item name, and clarify field for the category (if
any)
Gantt chart Item name and clarify field (if any)
Report Item name and clarify field (if any)
 
The Edit-Cut command is available for any item displayed by the
active view. In an item detail, it is available only for image fields
and any edit box.
Edit-Copy
See Also
Use the Edit-Copy command (or press ctrl+insert) to copy
highlighted data to the Clipboard. This command can be used on
items in the active category and on fields in an item detail.
 
It is particularly useful for copying field values between items in
the same or different categories.
 
Typically, you use the Edit-Copy command to copy data from a
field that you want to move to another field. For items, only a
subset of the item's fields are copied to the Clipboard (see
below).
 
Display an item detail or view and highlight the field data or item
that you want to copy to the Clipboard. Then, select the Edit-
Copy command from the menu bar. Typically, you would then
display the item detail to which you want to copy the information
and use the Edit-Paste command to paste the data into a field.
 
For fields, only the visibly highlighted text is placed on the
Clipboard.
 
For items, the fields copied to the Clipboard depend on the view
type and category, as follows:
 
Book All fields in the view (see Customize-Design View)
Calendar Start time field for view (see Customize-Design
View), item name, and clarify field for the category (if
any)
Gantt chart Item name and clarify field (if any)
Report Item name and clarify field (if any)
 
The Edit-Copy command is available for any item displayed by
the active category. In an item detail, it is available only for image
fields and any edit box.
Edit-Clear
See Also
Use this command (or press delete) to delete highlighted data
without placing a copy on the Clipboard. This command can be
used on items in the active category and on image fields and edit
boxes in an item detail. If the cursor is in an edit box and no data
is highlighted, this command deletes the character directly to the
right of the cursor (if any).
 
Display an item detail or view and highlight the field data or item
that you want to delete. Then, select the Edit-Clear command
from the menu bar.
 
For fields, only the visibly highlighted text is deleted. For items,
the entire item is deleted, regardless of how much of the item is
actually visible in the active window.
 
The Edit-Clear command is available for any highlighted item
displayed by the active view. In an item detail, however, it is
available only for image fields and edit boxes.
Edit-Paste
See Also
Use this command (or press shift+insert) to copy data from the
Clipboard into a field. It is available only when an item detail is
displayed.
 
The Edit-Paste command is used to copy data into an item detail
field from the Clipboard.
 
Display an item detail and select the field into which you want to
copy the data that is currently on the Clipboard (optionally,
highlight any data you want to replace). Then, select the Edit-
Paste command. Data from the clipboard is copied into the
selected field, replacing any highlighted data.
 
The Edit-Paste command is available only for image fields and
edit boxes.
Edit-Copy To
See Also
Use this command to copy highlighted data to a file. It is available
only when an item detail is displayed and data in an edit box is
highlighted.
 
Display an item detail and highlight the field data that you want to
copy. Then, select the Edit-Copy To command from the menu
bar. A Copy To File dialog box is displayed that asks you for the
file name to which the data should be copied.
 
Edit-Copy To is available only for edit boxes. Only the visibly
highlighted text is copied to the file.
Edit-Paste From
See Also
Use this command to paste data from a file into a field. It is
available only when an item detail is displayed and the cursor is
located in an edit box. This command cannot be used to paste an
image from a file into an image field.
 
Display an item detail and place the cursor in the edit box into
which you want to read the field data. Highlight any field data to
be replaced. Then, select the Edit-Paste From command from
the menu bar.
 
The Paste From File dialog box is displayed. It asks you for the
file name from which the data should be pasted.
 
Data from the file is copied into the currently selected edit box,
replacing any highlighted data. If there is too much text in the file
to fit in the field, Commence asks you if you want to continue. If
you respond Yes, data is added to the field up to the capacity of
the field.
Edit-Global Search
See Also
Use this command, or the corresponding button on the tool bar, to
locate items from any or all categories containing specific text or
a wildcard pattern.
Using global search, you can quickly locate all pertinent
information for an important meeting, find all the notes, phone
calls, etc., that refer to a particular person or topic, display all
items from all categories with a certain date or time, and more.
Commence searches all name, text, date, time, data file, check
box, and radio group type fields for the given Search Text and
displays a list of items with fields that contain the search text.
Number, calculation, image, Excel cell, and sequence number
fields, as well as connection definitions, are not searched by the
global searching mechanism. To look for items based on
information in field types not scanned by global search, use
Customize-Filter View command
When you select Global Search, Commence displays the Global
Search dialog box. Type the text you want to search for in the
Search Text text box and select the Start Search button (the
label on this button then changes to Stop Search). Items are
displayed in a list box as they are found. A message box informs
you when the search is complete.
In the Search Text text box of the Global Search dialog box you
can use a question mark wildcard character to substitute for any
single character, and an asterisk (*) to substitute for one or more
characters.
Fuzzy searching is selected using the Match dropdown list.
Select "Fuzzy", "Fuzzier" or "Fuzziest" to accommodate possible
misspellings in the search text.
Commence searches all categories by default. Use the
Categories button to exclude categories from the search.
Commence looks for any field that contains the search text. Look
for exact matches of field contents by turning on the Equals radio
button. The case (upper or lowercase) of the search text is
ignored unless you turn on the Case Sensitive check box.
Selecting the Categories button on the Global Search dialog box
displays the Select Search Categories dialog box from which you
can alter the list of categories searched. On the first search after
selecting the Tools-Global Search command, all categories are
selected by default.
Find Find allows you to search for a text string in the
items in the current view or item detail. The Find
command will tell you of the first instance it finds of
the text string and lets you edit the item. You can
then continue your search. Find works on Name,
date, number, phone, text, time, Excel cell, and data
file fields.
 
If using Find in a view, Commence will only search the fields
included in the view. If you want to search fields that are not in
the view, you need to include them using Customize-Design
View-Fields. Also, Find will not search fields from connected
categories, even if they are displayed in the view.
Find & Replace
Find and Replace allows you to search for a text string in the
items in the current view or item detail and, if desired, replace it
with another text string. Find & Replace works on Name, date,
number, phone, text, time, Excel cell, and data file fields.
 
If using Find & Replace in a view, Commence will only search the
fields included in the view. If you want to search fields that are not
in the view, you need to include them using Customize-Design
View-Fields. Also, Find & Replace will not search fields from
connected categories, even if they are displayed in the view.
 
WARNING Be careful when using Find & Replace in a view and
using the Replace All button. All occurrences of the find text will
be replaced without being prompted and the changes CANNOT
be undone.
 
Note If you are using Find & Replace in an item detail, the
changes are not saved until you save the item.
Edit-Add ? Item
See Also
Use this command to add an item to any category. You can also
select the equivalent button from the tool bar or press ctrl+a
(with no active view) to invoke this command.
The Edit-Add ? Item command can be selected at any time to
add an item to any category.
When you select this command, Commence displays the Add
Item dialog box. After selecting the appropriate category and
detail form from the dialog box, the detail form you selected is
displayed.
Once you have completed filling in the fields on the detail form,
select the Save button to add the item; the Cancel button on the
detail form cancels the Add ? Item command.
If time conflict checking is enabled for the active category (see
Customize-Database-Category-Time Conflict), Commence checks
to see if the item being added conflicts with the date and time of
another item already in the category. If so, you are asked for
confirmation before the item is added.
If a detail form allows you to add recurring items to a category
(such as the Initial Form for the Appointment category) and
conflict checking is enabled for the, Commence checks to see if
any of the recurring items being added conflict with the dates and
times of any other items already in the category. If so, a list of all
conflicting item names is displayed and you are given the option
to ignore these conflicts or cancel the addition of all of the items.
Note that once the new item is added, it is not necessarily
displayed by the active view (if any); this depends upon the filter
used by the view and the contents of the item.
The new item is highlighted in any view containing it when it is
added. Views containing the new item may need to be redrawn
on your terminal when the new item is added.
Edit-Add Item
See Also
Use this command to add an item to the active category. You can
also select the equivalent button from the tool bar or press ctrl+a
(with an active view of the category) to invoke this command. If
there is no active view or item detail, selecting the button or
pressing ctrl+a invokes the Edit-Add ? Item command.
If there is an active view or item detail, Commence assumes you
want to add an item to the active category and displays a detail
form for that category.
If no views are currently open, the Add Item dialog box is
displayed. After selecting the appropriate category and detail form
from the dialog box, the detail form you selected is displayed.
Once you have completed filling in the fields on the detail form,
select the Save button to add the item; the Cancel button on the
detail form cancels the Add Item command.
If time conflict checking is enabled for the active category (see
Customize-Database-Category-Time Conflict), Commence checks
to see if the item being added conflicts with the date and time of
another item already in the category. If so, you are asked for
confirmation before the item is added. Time conflict checking also
makes sure that you specify a start time that is later than the end
time of the item.
If a detail form allows you to add recurring items to a category
(such as the Initial Form for the Appointment category) and
conflict checking is enabled for the category, Commence checks
to see if any of the recurring items being added conflict with the
dates and times of any other items already in the category. If so,
a list of all conflicting item names is displayed and you are given
the option to ignore these conflicts or cancel the addition of all of
the items.
Note that once the new item is added, it is not necessarily
displayed by the active view (if any); this depends upon the filter
used by the view and the contents of the item.
The new item is highlighted in any view containing it when it is
added. Views containing the new item may need to be redrawn
on your terminal when the new item is added.
Edit-Edit Item
Use this command to select an item from the active view for
editing. You can edit any of the fields in the item detail displayed.
This command is available only if there is an active view.
 
Shortcut: You can also highlight an item and press enter, or
double-click the mouse on the item name, to edit its item detail.
 
Highlight the item you want to edit from the active view and select
the Edit-Edit Item command. Commence displays an item detail
of the item.
 
A detail form for the active category is displayed, filled in with the
field values for the selected item. Detail forms are specific to each
category.
 
Once you have completed editing the item's fields, select the
Save button to save your changes; the Cancel button cancels the
Edit-Edit Item command.
Edit-Copy Item
See Also
Use this command to add a new item to the active category by
copying the currently highlighted item or the displayed item detail.
This command is available only if an active view or item detail is
displayed.
 
This command is useful if you want to add an item to a category
that is similar to an existing item, without retyping all the identical
information.
 
You can only copy items within the category used by the active
view.
 
Highlight the item you want to copy from the active view, or
display the item's item detail, and select the Edit-Copy Item
command.
 
You can also copy an item from one category to another by
dragging the item and dropping it on another view. The field
values having identical names in the source and destination fields
are copied. If an appropriate connection exists between the two
categories, the destination item is connected to the source item. If
possible, Commence changes the values in the destination item
to match the values in the destination view's filter (if any). For
more information, see Drag and Drop Operations.
Note: If you drag an item from a Calendar view; to copy it you
must hold down the Ctrl key while dragging the item. The default
drag and drop operation for a Calendar view is move.
 
A detail form for the active category is displayed, filled in with the
field values for the selected item, except for the item name which
is left blank. Detail forms are specific to each category.
 
Once you have completed editing the fields on the layout
(including supplying an item name for the new item), select the
Save button to save your changes; the Cancel button cancels the
Edit-Copy Item command.
 
The new item is highlighted in any view containing it when it is
added. Views containing the new item may need to be redrawn
on your screen when the new item is added.
Edit-Delete Item
See Also
Use this command (or press ctrl+d) to delete the highlighted item
from the active category. This command is available only if there
is an active view or item detail. You can also use the Delete key
or the delete item button on the tool bar to invoke this command.
For more information see Drag and Drop Operations.
 
Highlight the item from the active category that you want to
delete, or display the item's item detail. Then, select the Edit-
Delete Item command from the menu bar to delete the item. You
can also drag an item in a view to the delete button on the
command bar and the item will be deleted.
 
Commence, depending on your preference settings, may ask for
confirmation before deleting the item. If it does, select the Yes
button to confirm the deletion; select the No button to cancel the
deletion. (See Edit-Preferences-Other).
 
If the item you are deleting is a recurring item, Commence will
prompt you for the range of items to delete.
 
The item immediately after the deleted item is highlighted in the
view. Views from which the item was deleted may need to be
redrawn on your screen.
Edit-Delete All Items
See Also
Use this command to delete all the items displayed by the active
view from the active category. This command is available only if
there is an active view and is not available for calendar views.
 
Select the Edit-Delete All Items command from the menu bar to
delete all items in the view from the active category.
 
If the active view currently displays all the items from the active
category, then the category is emptied. If the view is filtered, only
the items displayed by the active view are deleted.
 
Commence will ask for confirmation before deleting the items.
Type “yes” and then select the OK button to confirm the deletion;
select the Cancel button to cancel the deletion.
 
After the items are deleted, all open views of the active category
are updated and redrawn.
Edit-Share All Items
Use this command to promote all the items displayed by the
active view from the active category. This command is available
only if there is an active view for a shared category. It is not
available for calendar views.
Select the Edit-Share All Items command from the menu bar to
promote all items in the view to the shared database.
A local item is one that is stored only on your client database, you
are the only person who can add, edit, or delete it. Shared items
are used by all authorized Workgroup users.
If the active view currently displays all the items from the active
category, then all the items in the category are promoted. If the
view is filtered, only the items displayed by the active view are
promoted. If an item is already shared, its status does not
change.
You can tell the difference between a local and a shared item by
opening the item detail and looking at the Shared check box. If it
is turned on and grayed out, the item is shared. The Shared
check box does not appear if you are in a local category.
 
 
 
 
 
Edit-Preferences-Calendar
See Also
Use this command to define preferences for views
using the calendar view type.
These preferences control the starting day of the week for the
month displays in the day, month and year modes. It also affects
printing for the Day, Week, and Month calendar styles (see the
Print Calendar dialog box for an explanation of calendar printing
styles).
 
Selecting Preferences-Calendar
displays the Calendar Preferences
dialog box.
 
 
 
 
Edit-Preferences-Database
See Also
Use the Preferences-Database command to set a password for
your database and to set preferences for shared databases.
 
This tab displays this Database Preferences dialog box.
Edit-Preferences-Dialer
See Also
If you want to use Commence's automatic dialing feature to dial
telephone numbers from views and item details, you must select
your dialing device.
 
In Commence there is, by default, only one choice for dialing the
telephone from your PC:
-- Dial Using: Windows Telephony
Selecting the Control Panel button will switch you to the
Windows Control Panel to change the Windows Telephony
settings for your dialing device. Windows Telephony allows you to
autodial from Commence using a calling card. You can also
change the access codes used to dial your numbers based on
your location. If your phone/modem manufacturer also provides
you with a Telephony Service Provider (*.TSP), you may also be
able to use Caller ID on incoming calls.
 
Note: You will have to close Commence and restart it for Control
Panel changes to take effect.
 
 
Edit-Preferences-Event Logs
Use this command to change the categories used for logging
phone calls and letters. The Preferences-Event Logs command
displays the Log Preferences dialog box.
Edit-Preferences-Meeting
See Also
Use this command to select the category, fields and connection
definitions used when scheduling a meeting.
 
The Preferences-Meeting command displays the Meeting
Preferences dialog box.
 
 
 
 
 
Edit-Preferences-Other
Use the Preferences-Other command to set: whether you want
to activate the automatic minimize feature; the short date range;
name reversal on printing or exporting; your preference for agents
that display message boxes requiring a response; and external
data file preferences.
 
The Preferences-Other command displays the Other
Preferences
dialog box.
 
 
 
 
Edit-Preferences-Other Apps
See Also
Use the Preferences-Other Apps command to configure
Commence to be used with other applications such as:
E-mail applications that are MAPI, VIM or CMC compatible
Outlook E-mail Logging of Sent and Received messages
MAPI E-mail address book, such as MS Outlook
Palm Address Book
Palm Date Book
Palm Memo Pad
Palm To Do List
Mobile Link and Outlook Calendar
Mobile Link and Outlook Contacts
Mobile Link and Outlook Tasks
Mobile Link Notes
Symantec WinFax Phonebook (version 4.0 or later)
Edit-Preferences-Personal Info
See Also
The Preferences-Personal Info command has two purposes:
 
The Personal Information has two purposes:
-- to designate an item that contains information about you in
the open database.
-- to designate connection definitions that should automatically
be set to your item when adding items to particular
categories.
 
After you fill out this dialog box for the first time, the information
you entered can be viewed and changed using the Preferences-
Personal Info command. If you do not enter the item for yourself
information or if you later delete either the category or item
selected for yourself, the dialog box appears again the next time
you open the database.
 
Setting your personal information is particularly useful if selective
permissions are configured for one or more categories in the
database.
Note: If the active database is a shared database, be sure to
choose a shared category in the Category list box. Shared
categories are indicated by an asterisk at the end of the category
name. By choosing a shared category and item describing
yourself, agents, filters, and other data that use the special (-Me-)
keyword will be properly resolved to the item chosen in this dialog
box, both in your copy of the shared databases and in other
clients' copies. You can select a local category and item, but this
information will not be available to other shared database clients.
 
To use this dialog box:
 
1. Choose the category in which the item describing you exists,
or in which you will create it, from the Category list box. This
is called the user category.
2. Choose the name of the item from the Your Name list box.
This item is called the user item. If the selected category
does not have an item describing you, use the Add New
Item button to display an Add Item dialog box for the
selected category. After you fill out the item detail, select
Save to return to this dialog box.
3. In the large list box, highlight the connection definitions that
you want to automatically point to your item. For example,
highlighting the Activity - Relates to - Employee connection
tells Commence to automatically connect all new Calendar
items to the item you chose in Steps 1 and 2 (you can
override this for individual records on the item detail).
Highlight multiple connection definitions by clicking the mouse
over their names. Remove the highlight from a connection
definition by clicking the mouse over the highlighted name.
4. Select the Save button.
Edit-Preferences-Tool Bars
See Also
Use this command to control how the agent bar, the view bar, and
the status bar are displayed.
 
STYLE
The style you select alters subtle details such as the title bar
colors, window borders, view bar and tool bar background color,
and other visual attributes. Choose None to use the display
settings for your Operating System set via Control Panel.
SHOW AGENT TOOLBAR BUTTON
The agent bar is the row of buttons corresponding to any active
agents that have a Toolbar Pick trigger. If the Show Agent
Toolbar Buttons check box is turned on, the agent bar is
displayed; if not, the agent bar is hidden.
 
SHOW VIEW BAR
If the Show View Bar check box is turned on, the view bar is
displayed; if not, the view bar is hidden.
 
The view bar is the vertical column of icons to the left of the
Commence work area. If you choose to display the view bar, you
can choose to display view icons with or without labels. You can
also choose to display a small or large icons on the view bar. The
view bar can be used by mouse users only.
 
You can have up to 40 view icons on the view bar. The number of
visible view icons that display depend on your display type as well
as your view bar preferences. If your icons don't all fit on the view
bar, Commence will display up/down arrows at the top of the view
bar. You can select these with the mouse to scroll through the
icons.
 
INCLUDE LABELS
Turning off this checkbox will display the view icon but hide the
icon labels; hiding the labels reduces the icon size so the view
bar takes up less space. You can see the view names displayed
on the status bar when you hover your mouse over the icons.
 
USE LARGE BUTTONS
Turning on this checkbox will display full-size icons on the view
bar.
 
To save space for your work area, turn off this checkbox, and
smaller icons will be displayed on the view bar. Small icons allow
you to display more icons (without scrolling).
 
ICON DIRECTORY
You can choose from Commence's internal icons and your own
icons when selecting an icon for a view. You can create your own
icons in files with .ico extensions, and place these files either in a
database directory or in a central icon directory whose location is
set via the Icon Directory text box. The path you specify is
limited to 128 characters.
 
Icons can be created with a variety of drawing applications; you
may also obtain these files from the Internet or other users.
 
SHOW STATUS BAR
If the Show Status Bar check box is turned on, the status bar is
displayed; if not, the status bar is hidden.
 
 
 
 
 
Edit-Preferences-View
See Also
Use the Preferences-View command to set the conditions that
tell Commence what kinds of view
changes should be saved on closing a view, and whether to save
such a view automatically (silently) or display a Save View dialog
box
that allows you to choose a different name under which to save
the changed view.
 
If you are in the habit of having many views open during a
session and closing them when you exit Commence, the
automatic save option can save you some time and keystrokes.
 
 
 
 
Edit-Preferences-Letters
See Also
Use this command to set your preferences for the word
processors that you will use with letters. These preferences will
determine which word processor or text editor you use for text
(unformatted) letters and which word processor you will use for
formatted letters. You also use this command to tell Commence
what directory to use when it creates new letter files.
 
Text letters are created with text letter templates. These are flat
ASCII files that only contain plain text and Field Codes associated
with a particular category in Commence.
 
Formatted letter templates are used to create letters in a
particular word processor's native file format. Formatted
templates are themselves word processor documents and can
contain whatever formatting information the word processor
provides, in addition to the text and Field Codes used in text
templates.
 
If you have WinFax installed on your system and you use one of
the word processors that works with the Commence Letters
facility, then you can set up a new Word Processor Letter
Preference that allows you to fax a letter instead of printing it.
See Letter Fax Macros for more information.
 
The Preferences-Letters command displays the Letter
Preferences dialog box.
View-Open/Manage Views
See Also
Use this command to open, create new, edit and delete a view.
When you select the View-Open/Manage Views command from
the menu bar, Commence displays the Open/Manage Views
dialog box.
The Sort Views By radio group controls the sorting order of the
list box below. You can select one of the radio buttons in the Sort
Views By radio group to sort the list by view name (the default),
view type, or category. Commence remembers your sorting
preference until you exit Commence.
Open View:
To open a view from the list, highlight one of the views and select
the Open button. As a shortcut, double-click the mouse on the
desired view name to open it.
New View:
From the Open/Manage Views dialog box select the Create New
button. Use this command to create a new view by choosing a
category and view type.
Selecting the Create New button displays the New View dialog
box.
To open a new view using the New View dialog box, highlight a
category in the Category list box and select a view type from the
View As list box. If you choose a report view type, choose a
Report Style that includes all the fields from the highlighted
category in the report or the item name field only. Then, select the
View button to create and display the new view.
See View-Open/Manage Views to open a saved view.
Edit View:
To edit a view, highlight a view name from the list box displayed
and select the Edit button. This will display the Edit View dialog
box which allows you to change the name of the saved view;
choose whether or not to display the view's icon on the view bar
for convenient opening; choose an icon and a label for the view;
choose whether or not to display the view's name on the Views
menu for convenient opening.
Delete View:
To delete a view, highlight a view name from the list box
displayed and select the Delete button. As a shortcut, you can
delete a view by double-clicking the mouse on the view name you
want to delete.
Commence displays the Delete View dialog box. A message is
displayed asking for confirmation before deleting the view. Select
Yes to confirm the deletion of the view.
View-Save View
See Also
Use this command to save a new view or to save changes made
to a saved view. This command is available only if there is an
active view.
 
If the active view is a saved view, selecting the View-Save View
command silently saves any changes you have made to the
saved view's options.
 
If the active view is an unsaved view, Commence displays the
Save View dialog box, which asks for a name for the view. View
names are limited to 50 characters.
 
If active view is a saved view, and you want to save the changes
under a new view name (leaving the original saved view
unchanged), use the View-Save View As command.
 
This command does not close the active view. The active view
remains displayed after the completion or cancellation of this
command. (Press CTRL+F4 to close the view.)
 
If you don't save changes made to a (new or saved) view before
closing it or exiting Commence, Commence asks you if you want
to save the changes to the view before closing the view or exiting.
Answering Yes for a saved view silently saves the changes to the
view; for a new view, the Save View dialog box is displayed.
View-Save View As See Also
Use this command to save changes to the active view under a
name other than the name displayed in the title bar of the view's
window (leaving the original saved view unchanged), or to copy a
saved view. This command is available only if there is an active
view.
 
Selecting View-Save View As from the menu bar displays the
Save View dialog box. The name of the active view is filled into
the View Name text box. Type the name under which you want to
save the active view and then select the Save button to save the
view; select the Cancel button to cancel the command.
 
This command does not close the active view. The active view
remains displayed after the completion or cancellation of this
command. (Press CTRL+F4 to close the view.)
 
Use the View-Save View command to save the active view as
itself.
View-Save View As File
 
Use this command to export the data in the active view to a file.
This command is available only if there is an active view in
calendar, report, or grid format. Simply open a saved view (or
create a new view) then select one of the options below.
Create CSV - this auto-creates a simple ASCII text (CSV) file
suitable for importing to another application
Create HTML - this auto-creates a basic HyperText Markup
Language (HTML) file
Create HTML Wizard - select this option if you would like to
apply optional formatting to your HTML file. You will be
prompted step-by-step to select a pre-formatted HTML to use
as a template (for the fonts, colors, layout, etc.), you can add
a header and footer, and also choose the destination folder
and filename where the HTML file will be saved.
You can prepare your view ahead of time using the Customize-
Design View command. Choose only the fields and connections
you wish to include in the file.
Fields: Open the Fields tab to select the fields and
connections to display. Only these columns will be included
in the saved file.
Field Labels: If you have custom field labels for each column,
these custom labels will be used as the column headers.
Filters: If you have filters on the view, these are supported.
Only the items displayed in the view will be included in the
file.
Sorts: The file will be sorted the same as your view.
Group Headers and Group Totals: Grouping is not supported;
these will be skipped.
Fonts and Color codes: Font formatting is not applied when
using the Create CSV or Create HTML commands. To create
a formatted HTML, use the Create HTML Wizard command
and select your custom HTML template to apply these fonts
and colors to your saved HTML file.
Create HTML Wizard
Perform the following steps to create an HTML file using the
wizard:
 
1. Open a calendar, report or grid view.
If the view is not currently in calendar, report or grid format,
use the View-View As command to change the view type to
either calendar, report or grid.
2. Select the View-Save View As File- Create HTML Wizard
command from the ribbon to save the view to an external
HTML file. The Save As HTML dialog box appears.
3. Follow the on-screen instructions to create an HTML file with
data from the active view.
The resulting file can then be viewed using a standard Web
browser, such as Microsoft Internet Explorer.
 
Selecting the Cancel button will cancel the command and will not
save a file.
 
The Save View as File commands do not modify the active view.
 
View-View As
See Also
Use this command to display the active view as a new view using
a different view type.
 
The View-View As group of commands effectively copies the
active view to a new view type. Select any view type (Report,
Book, Calendar, Gantt, Grid, Report Viewer) from the menu bar.
 
A new view is opened using the (possibly filtered) active category
and the new view type specified. The previous active view (on
which the new view is based) remains displayed in the
background and is left unchanged.
 
If you want to retain this new view, you must save it using the
View-Save View or View-Save View As commands.
Switch Windows-1, 2, 3...
See Also
Make the selected view the active view. Choosing an open view
name from the Window menu makes it easy for you to switch to
another view when you have a number of views displayed and
some are hidden behind others.
 
Note that you can also use the key combination CTRL+F6 to
successively select views on the desktop as the active view.
 
A numbered list of open views appears at the bottom of the View
menu. The text of the entry on the menu for a view matches the
view title shown in the title bar of the view window.
 
The currently active view has a check mark next to its name in
the list. Selecting a view from the list makes the chosen view the
active view.
View-Cascade
Use this command to layer all open windows on the desktop, so
that the title bar of each is visible. This makes it easier for you to
switch between open views, while displaying as much of the
active view as possible.
View-Tile Horizontally
Use this command to size and re-display all open views
horizontally on the desktop, so that no window overlaps another.
This lets you see at least a portion of all the currently open views.
View-Tile Vertically
Use this command to size and re-display all open views vertically
on the desktop, so that no window overlaps another. This lets you
see at least a portion of all the currently open views.
View-Resize All
Resize all open views to fit on the active desktop while
maintaining the relative proportions and positions of the individual
views.
View-Close All See Also
Close all open windows on the desktop (including any hidden
behind other windows). This command provides an alternative to
closing each individual window.
 
If any of the open views have been changed and the changes not
saved, you will be prompted to save the views, depending on
your view preference settings.
View-More Windows
See Also
Displays the Select Window dialog box. This dialog box lets you
select a view other than one of the nine shown on the Window
menu to be the active view. Only nine open views can appear on
the Window menu. If more than nine views are open, the More
Windows... command is placed on the Window menu. Choosing
an open view name from the Window menu makes it easy for you
to switch to another view when you have many views displayed
and some are hidden behind others.
 
Note that you can also use the key combination CTRL+F6 to
successively select views in the workspace as the active view.
 
The currently active view has a check mark next to its name in
the list at the bottom of the Window menu. If the active view does
not appear on the Window menu, a check mark appears next to
the More Windows... command.
Customize-Design View
See Also
Use this command or the corresponding button on the tool bar to
display and edit the design for the active view or displayed item
detail.
Display Specify a default title and paper layout for printing a view.
Fields Select the fields to be displayed on the view, and decide
what order to display them in. Combine multiple
fields to be displayed on the same line. Change the
font used for each field individually.
Colors Select the color code template to be used for the view.
Turn on options to show legend or color code item
text.
Fonts Select the font and font size used for item text and label
text.
Report Viewer
When you select the Customize-Design View command with an
active Report Viewer window, the following options are displayed.
Filter/Sort Select the filter and sort for the report viewer.
Designer Launch the Report Designer for the active report viewer
window.
Detail Form
When you select the Customize-Design View command with an
active item detail, the Design Detail Form dialog box is displayed.
 
Note: The changes you make to views using the Customize
menu commands are temporary unless you save the view; see
View-Save View and View-Save View As.
Customize-Filter View Use this command to select a
subset of items from the active category for display
by the active view. This subset can be based on up
to four field values, connected item names, and/or
connected field values. You can also press CTRL+F
or select the corresponding filter button from the
tool bar to invoke this command.
 
The Customize-Filter View command displays the Filters dialog
box.
 
The Clear All button on the Summary tab clears all filters and
displays all items in the category.
Customize-Sort View (Gantt, Report and Grid view
types only)
Use this command, or the corresponding button on the tool bar, to
change the sort fields for the items in a Gantt chart, report or grid
view. This command is available only if the active view is a Gantt
chart, report or grid view.
 
Items in a report and grid views, by default, are sorted in
ascending ASCII order by the name field of each item.
 
Items in a Gantt chart view, by default, are sorted by three fields:
 
First, by the Start Date field, so that items with the earliest
start dates are displayed at the top of the chart, the latest at
the bottom.
Second, by the End Date field, so that items with the same
start date are displayed in ascending date order within the
group of items with the same start date.
Third, by the item name field, so that items with the same start
and end dates are displayed in ascending ASCII order by their
item name fields.
 
(Note that the fields used for Start Date and End Date in a Gantt
chart view are set when the view is created; you can change them
using the Customize-Design View command.)
 
Using the Customize-Sort View command, you can change:
 
the number of sort fields
the fields used to sort items (maximum of four fields)
the sort type for each sort field (ascending or descending
ASCII)
the groups and sub-totals (for report and grid views only)
 
Selecting the Customize-Sort View command displays the Sort
Fields dialog box.
Customize-Desktops
A desktop is a group of open views. You may want to define one
desktop for your Project Management reports and another for
your Contact Management views. A database can have up to 100
desktops defined. You can display desktops as stacked tabs on
the Commence view bar.
 
To open a desktop: Select Customize-Open/Manage Desktop.
From there you can highlight the desktop that you would
like to open and select the Open button. If you have the
desktop displayed as a tab, you only need to click on the
tab for that desktop.
 
To display the Desktop Tabs:
Select Customize-Open/Manage Desktop. Check the
Show As View Bar Tabs check box.
 
To Add a New Desktop:
Select Customize-Open/Manage Desktop Select the Add
button. Choose a name for your new desktop. This name
should describe the type of information that you will
display on this tab.
If you mark the Save Desktop on Exit checkbox, the
desktop will be saved each time you exit Commence.
If you mark the Show As View Bar Tab checkbox, a tab
will be displayed the Commence View Bar. If you do not
show the desktop tab, you will be able to access the
desktop by selecting Customize-Open/Manage Desktop
You can also choose the color the desktop tab and you
can choose a bitmap (*.BMP) or JPEG file to use as the
background of the desktop.
 
To Edit or Delete a Desktop:
Select Customize-Open/Manage Desktop. From there
you can highlight the desktop that you would like to edit or
delete, select the appropriate button.
Customize-Database
One of the most powerful features of Commence is its flexibility.
You can add and change categories, connections between
categories, create agents, etc. to suit your specific needs.
For more information about a particular topic, select the topic
from the list below:
Agent Add, edit, copy, or delete agents in the active database.
Category Add, edit, copy, or delete categories in the active
database.
Color Code Add, edit, and delete color code templates in the
active database.
Connection Add, rename, and delete connection definitions in the
active database.
Detail Form Add, edit, copy, and delete item detail forms for the
selected category in the active database.
Import/Export Add, edit, copy, and delete import/export templates
in the active database.
Letter Template Add, edit, and delete letter templates for the
selected category in the active database.
Customize-Workgroup
The Customize-Workgroup Command is used in different ways
depending on which database is open.
Enroll Client
When you select Customize-Workgroup from a standalone
database (one which is not already a client in a workgroup) this
command: * begins the Enroll client process, allowing you to
access a shared database
Server Administration
When you select Customize-Workgroup at the Commence
Server, this command allows you to:
* set default and selective permissions for the active shared
database
* assign user permissions for shared categories in the active
shared database
* configure communication settings for using a shared LAN
drive and/or E-Mail to sync with the Commence clients
* register clients
Configure Client Synchronization Settings
When you select Customize-Workgroup at a Commence Client,
this command allows you to:
* configure communication settings for using a shared LAN
drive, FTP Internet folder, or E-Mail to sync with the
Commence Server
Related Topics for Server Administration:
Database Options
Permissions
Communications
Register
Related Topics for Enrolling Client:
Communications
Enroll
Tools-Outlook Sync
See Also
Integrating Commence with Microsoft Outlook enables
Commence users to share their meetings, contacts, and tasks/to-
dos with Outlook users. The result is a comprehensive
calendar,address book, and Task list in both applications.
 
To synchronize information between Commence and Outlook:
1 Start Commence and open the database that is configured to
synchronize with Microsoft Outlook.
2 In Commence, select Tools - Outlook Sync.
3 A dialog will be displayed showing the status of the
synchronization between Commence and Outlook.
Note: This command will synchronize all mapped Outlook
applications at the same time.
Tools-Spell Check
Use this command to check the spelling of words in a text field;
either the cursor or some highlighted text must be present in the
text field in order to start the spell checker. Otherwise, the Tools-
Spell Check command is unavailable.
 
If spellings appear in the text that are not in Commence's
dictionary, or your personal dictionary, Commence displays the
Spell Checker dialog box.
 
You can:
 
accept single or multiple occurrences of a misspelled word
edit the misspelled word by typing a correction from the
keyboard or choosing a correction from a list of suggestions
generated by the spell checker
add spellings to your personal dictionary
 
Select a button from the dialog box to perform the indicated
operation on the currently highlighted word or select Done to exit
the spell checker.
 
If the spell checker finds no spelling mistakes in the field text,
Commence displays a message box that informs you of this fact.
Select OK from the box and the spell checker exits.
Tools-Field Summary
See Also
Use the Tools-Field Summary command to display a total and/or
average of the selected calculation and number fields for the
items in the view. For example, the field summary can be used to
calculate total sales for a month, or to check if expenses have
exceeded a maximum amount.
 
The summary takes the data in the selected fields for all the items
in the active view, and shows the name of each field followed by
one or both of:
 
the combined arithmetic average of the data in the field for
all items
 
the combined total of the data in the field for all items
 
The summary for the selected fields will appear in a Field
Summary dialog box. The field summary also appears at the
bottom of the printed report. This command is available only if the
active view is a report.
 
The fields shown in the summary report (and whether to calculate
the average, total, or both) are selected using the Customize-
Design View command. Select the Fields Tab. Move (append or
insert) the field into the report and select the Field Options for
that field. Check the boxes labeled Total or Average (one or both
boxes may be checked as needed).
 
Note: Only the calculation and number fields displayed in the view
and whose field options have been set for summary reporting
appear in the field summary.
Tools-Schedule Meeting
If you are scheduling appointments for a group of people, you can
use this command to find a date and time for a meeting based
upon the availability of selected participants. Once you’ve
selected a date and time, the item is added to your group
calendar. Other meeting details (location, comments, resources,
and a meeting coordinator) can also be chosen. Once you
schedule the meeting, you can review the meeting's details by
opening a view of the Appointment category or by selecting the
item detail from your calendar.
 
When you select the Tools-Schedule Meeting command, the
Schedule Meeting dialog box appears.
 
If Microsoft Outlook Calendar is configured in the Edit-
Preferences-Other Apps menu command, the Schedule Meeting
command will launch the Microsoft Outlook Meeting Scheduler.
Refer to the Microsoft Outlook online help for additional
information about using the Microsoft Outlook Meeting Scheduler.
 
Note: For information about using the Schedule Meeting
command with custom categories and connection definitions, see
Meeting Preferences command.
 
 
 
 
 
Tools-Sync Link In
See Also
Use this command to synchronize
a database from an update file previously created with the Sync
Link Out command.
 
Selecting the Sync
Link In command displays the Select
File to Sync In dialog box.
Specify the file name of the update file
and the sync in process begins when you select OK.
 
 
 
 
Tools-Sync Link Out
See Also
Use this command to:
Define the remote PCs that will be in your sync link group.
Edit or delete the remote PCs in your sync link group.
Create an initial update file for each of the remote databases.
Create an incremental update of your database to take a
remote database.
Selecting the Sync Link Out command displays the Sync Link
Out Options dialog box.
 
In this dialog box, you can define and maintain a set of two or
more identical databases (called a sync link group). You can also
manage this sync link group by adding, editing, and deleting
remote databases. Once you establish a sync link group you can
compress a Commence database into a single file (called an
update file) to sync link the database changes from one PC to
the other as you move between them. When you choose the
database to synchronize and select OK, the sync out begins.
Tools-Transfer In
See Also
Use this command to copy the definitions (and data, if any)
contained in a file previously created with the Transfer Out
command.
Overview
Selecting the File-Transfer In command displays the Select
Transfer File dialog box. Specify the file name of the transfer file
and If the selected transfer file contains only definitions and no
data, the transfer in process begins when you select OK.
 
Data definitions are always added unless there is an existing
definition of the same type with the same name (e.g., you try to
transfer in a People category into a database that already has a
People category). If Transfer In detects a definition in the
transfer file with the same name as an already existing definition
in the open database, the incoming definition is not transferred.
See the Transferring In Definitions with Duplicate Names section
in the description of the Transfer Rules dialog box for information
about using Transfer In to merge similar but different definitions
with the same name.
 
Note: Data items may have been included in a transfer file
explicitly as part of the transfer out operation, or included
automatically by Commence because a category, view, or agent
definition being transferred depends on them. See Transfer Out
for more information on items included in a transfer file.
.
Tools -Transfer Out
See Also
Transfer Out copies selected categories, views, and agents from
a Commence database into a DOS file. You may optionally
choose to copy the data contained in selected categories and
views. The resulting transfer file is the input file for a Transfer In
command.
 
Use this command to:
Move definitions you have developed in one database into
another of your own databases.
Share definitions you have developed with another
Commence user.
Overview
Selecting the Transfer Out command displays the Transfer Out
Options dialog box.
 
In this dialog box, you specify whether to transfer all definitions
for selected categories or just the definitions required by
selected views of the categories. Then you select any agents to
transfer. You also select whether to transfer items and related
data files (DOS files pointed to by data file fields). Once you've
made your choices and selected OK, then specify a transfer file
name. Once you choose a file name, the transfer out begins.
 
Automatic Inclusion of Dependent Data and
Definitions
When you select categories, views, or agents for transfer,
Commence automatically determines the additional definitions
and data that are required by a category or view, or those
required for the operation of an agent. Dependent data for a
category or view might be names of connected items in other
categories or color code templates. Dependent data for an agent
might be another agent or items used by a filter in a trigger,
condition, or action.
 
The following list shows the dependent data and definitions
selected for categories, views, and agents:
 
Category All category field definitions.
All category connection definitions and all directly related
definitions from the connected category.
All item detail forms for the category.
All view definitions that use the transferred category, their
options and filters.
All color code templates for the category.
View Associated category's definition, along with the categories
of any indirect fields.
All connection definitions used in the view.
All item detail forms for the relevant categories.
All color code templates usable by the view.
Agent All necessary categories, views, and other agents needed
by the agent.
All data items from relevant categories used in trigger, condition,
or action filters.
Note: If you want to transfer only items, use the Export-By
Category command or the Export By-View command to create a
DOS file and use the Import command to read the file into a
database.
 
 
Specifying Data File Transfer Location
The File-Transfer Out command lets you transfer out items as
well as definitions to a DOS file. If you elect to transfer out items,
you may also choose to transfer out any related data files (i.e.,
DOS files pointed to by data file type fields) that are referenced
by the transferred items.
 
When you transfer into a database a file that has definitions,
items, and related data files, Commence needs to know where to
put the related data files on your hard disk. This is because the
directory structure on your computer and the directory structure
of the computer on which the transfer file was created are most
likely different.
 
Select the Edit-Preferences-Other command to choose a location
in which to store related data files transferred into the currently
open database. Enter the directory name and overwrite option in
the External Data Files group box.
Tools-Import
See Also
Use this command to populate a category in your open
Commence database using:
data from external applications or
data exported from another category in this or another
Commence database
To import category data, highlight the name of the import/export
template you want to use and select the Import button.
 
When you select the Import button, Commence displays the
Select Import File dialog box so you can select the name of the
external file you want to import.
 
Commence scans the import file you choose and displays a
message box if it finds a problem with the file, such as incorrect
formatting. The message displayed indicates the source of the
problem. Select OK to return to the Import dialog box; to
continue importing, you must either fix the import file or pick
another one to import.
 
Provided the file you chose matches the format of your
import/export template, and no errors are found in the file,
Commence begins importing the data in the external file into the
category in your open Commence database. Commence displays
a message box as the import progresses. You can select Cancel
to stop the import operation, but this will leave the import partially
completed and your category contents in an indeterminate state.
When the import is complete, select OK.
Tools-Export-By View
See Also
Use this command to copy data from items in the active view to
an external file
for use with external applications or
for use in another category, either in the open database or in
a different Commence database
Only the items that appear in the view are included in the export.
 
Use the Export By View command with a filtered view to export
data from a subset of the items in a category. If you use the
Archive option when you export, only the items in the view will be
deleted from the category; this is a handy way of backing up old
items and deleting them from the category to make room for new
items.
 
The dialog boxes displayed by and the behavior of this command
are identical to the Export-By Category command, except that
the items exported are a subset of the items in the category as
determined by the view filter. If the view is unfiltered, then all
items from the active category are exported.
 
Selecting this command displays the Export dialog box.
Tools-Export-By Category
See Also
Use this command to copy data in a category to an external file:
for use with external applications or
for use in another category, either in the open database or in
a different Commence database
You can export data that is in one of three external file formats,
ASCII, dBASE, or DIF.
 
You tell Commence how to export to an external data file by
defining an import/export template. This template tells Commence
how to extract data from your category and how to write your
external file. If you use the Archive option when you export by
category, all the items in the category will be deleted from the
database; this is a handy way of backing up old items and
deleting them from the category to make room for new items.
 
The Export-By Category command displays the Export dialog
box.
Help-Index
Use this command to display the main index for Commence's on-
line help system.
 
From the Index you can select one of the listed topics or search
through the Help System for topics containing keywords.
 
Exit the help topic by selecting ALT+F4 or File-Close from the help
screen's menu bar.
Getting Help on Dialog and Message Boxes
If a dialog or message box is displayed, press F1 or SHIFT-F1 to
display a help topic from the Commence Help System that
describes the dialog box or message box (including error
messages) in detail. Exit the help topic by selecting ALT+F4 or File-
Close from the help screen's menu bar.
Help-How Do I?
This help section describes common Commence functions and
steps to perform them.
 
It is divided into the following topics:
How Do I ...
Work with Views?
Use Filters?
Search for text in multiple Fields?
Find Items in a large list?
Copy an Item?
Add a Field to a Category?
Edit a Field in a Category?
Customize where Fields appear in a Form?
Design a Custom Paper Layout
Add a Command Line Option
Backup a Commence Database
Restore a Commence Database
Open a Database
Add a new database
Edit the Name of an existing database
Delete a database
Help-Tutorial Database
 
To enter the tutorial environment, select the Tutorial Database
button on the Help ribbon menu. This creates a special 'sand-box'
environment in which you can practice using Commence without
affecting any of your live data in any other database. Note this is not
a self-running demo; you can try out any command or feature at
your own pace.
 
The Help-Tutorial Database command:
 
changes to an alternate database directory used only for
tutorial data. Select the Help-System Information-Directory
Information command for the path to the tutorial database.
optionally re-populates the tutorial database with a fresh copy
of the sample data
highlights the Tutorial Database button on the Help ribbon
menu, to remind you that you are currently in the tutorial
environment
disables the Open/Manage Database command, so that you
must exit the tutorial database using the Help-Tutorial
Database command before opening another database
disables the Sync Link In, and Sync Link Out commands;
these commands are unavailable while in the Tutorial
 
Each time you select this command, you are asked whether you
want to replace the existing tutorial data with a fresh copy of the
data. If you select Yes, the data currently in the tutorial database is
overwritten with a new copy of the data as it first appeared when
you installed Commence. Any changes you've made to the tutorial
data are lost. This is a convenient way of starting with fresh tutorial
data after you experiment with it for a while. Selecting No retains the
current data in the tutorial database so that you can return to the
environment as you left it.
 
Once you change to the tutorial data, the title bar of the Commence
main window changes to indicate you are using tutorial data.
 
To return to your live database, select the Help-Tutorial Database
menu entry again; or, exit Commence and then restart it.
 
Some of the examples in the help system refer to the tutorial data.
You may want to switch to using the Tutorial data as you read
certain sections of help.
Help-System Information
Use this command to display information about your hardware and
software operating environment, and other information. This
information is useful for confirming that your system setup is as you
expect and for reporting problems with Commence.
 
The System Information dialog box allows you to select the type of
information you would like to display. Click on the Display drop-
down list and choose one of the following:
 
Category Information Displays the Commence category
names and identification numbers.
Directory Information Displays the full path names to various
folders used by Commence.
Memory Information See the documentation for your system
hardware and software for explanations of displayed
information.
System Information See the documentation for your system
hardware and software for explanations of displayed
information.
Version Information Displays the name and version number
of the files installed that Commence requires for execution.
Workgroup Information Displays the database workgroup ID
number and other information pertaining to the workgroup.
 
When you select the Save to file... button, the information from all
the different system information screens will be saved to a text file.
By default, a file named COMMENCE.TXT will be saved in the
Commence application data directory.
 
Select the Close button on the message box displayed to return to
the desktop.
Help-Check For Updates
Use this command to download and install software maintenance
updates from Commence Corporation.
 
When running the Check For Updates command on a Commence
server you will have two options:
Download: Obtains the installation files from the Commence
Corporation web server and saves the files to a directory of
your choice. The files can then be copied to an intranet folder
for off-line distribution to users who do not have an Internet
connection. Refer to the Server Guide for additional
configuration instructions.
Download and Install Update: Obtains the installation files
from the Commence Corporation web server and applies the
update to your Commence Server installation.
Note: An Internet connection is required to update your Commence
server installation using the Check For Updates command.
 
When running the Check For Updates command on a Commence
client, the software will first check if a newer version is available.
Then the update will automatically be downloaded and installed.
Help-About
Use this command to display information about Commence and its
creator, Commence Corporation. This information includes how to
contact Commence Technical Support.
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction
See Also
Commence Corporation offers different software products which
let you operate in either standalone
or workgroup
environments.
In a standalone installation the Commence software is used to
maintain databases to which only one user at a time from a single
PC can have access.
This version of Commence is referred to as Commence
standalone. See Basic Concepts for an introduction to basic
Commence features.
In a typical workgroup environment, several Commence users on
different PCs with access to a shared FTP directory, a local area
network (LAN) or E-Mail may share database information using
the Commence Server and Client software. This version of
Commence is referred to as Commence Workgroup. Commence
Workgroup’s networking capabilities allow users to share and
periodically synchronize a database with the server using either a
local area network or a compatible Windows e-mail program.
Users on different PCs can share information in the same
databases, viewing and updating information simultaneously.
They may also define private information which other users
cannot see or access. Different levels of authorization can be
defined to control various access privileges.
Commence uses a distributed database architecture where each
client
of the workgroup has their own local copy of the shared
database. This has many advantages, including:
 
Users
can use their local copy of the shared database off-line.
While connected to the LAN, data is automatically
synchronized with all other users on the network. When
disconnected, Commence remembers the changes that have
been made. Then when remote users log back into the
network, by physically re-attaching or by calling in from a
remote client PC, their changes and updates are
automatically synchronized with the other users, and vice
versa, thereby keeping everyone’s' data in sync. This has the
added advantage of allowing users to continue using
Commence when the network is down. Those who
synchronize via e-mail will continue to communicate their
changes to the server as long as they can send and receive
e-mail.
. Similarly, users who synchronize using an Internet
connection will continue synchronizing as long as the Internet
connection is intact.
There
is no data locking so all information is available at all
times, authorizations permitting. Some other workgroup
products lock records as they are being viewed making them
unavailable to other users. Your data is in a local database
and is always available.
Users
can create private information that stays at their local
copy of the shared database. Private or local information
does not synchronize with the server or with any other users
of the workgroup, thereby protecting the user’s private
information.
One copy of a shared database resides on the Commence server,
which
is created when you, the Administrator, install the Server Edition
of Commence. Each Commence user has his or her own copy of
Commence, called the Commence client, and a copy of the
shared database, called the client database. Together the server
and Commence clients, along with their copies of the shared
database, are called a Commence workgroup.
 
Typical Commence Workgroup Configuration
With this model, authorized workgroup users always have instant
access to information in the shared database. All additions, edits,
etc., that a user makes to the shared data at his or her client are
sent via the LAN to the server copy of the database, and changes
made by other workgroup users are sent to each user's client
database. Even if the user disconnects the client PC from the
LAN and make changes to the data, the changes are
automatically sent to the server database when the user
reconnects to the LAN. In other words, the workgroup server and
its clients are constantly synchronized, and all workgroup users
have the most recently updated information at all times.
 
 
 
 
Getting Started
There are several things that you must do to install and set up
your Commence workgroup. These steps should be performed in
the following order.
1. Install the server software. You need to run the installation
program and determine the proper paths for the various
components of the Commence Server.
2. Administer licenses. Before a user can be added to the
Commence Administration Program, ComAdmin, you must
first set the total number of users in your workgroup using
the License Administration program.
3. Add users. Users of a Commence Workgroup need to be
added to ComAdmin. A user must be added to be able to
use a shared database and share information.
4. Set up a shared database. You must define a shared
database. This will be the basis for your Commence
workgroup. You set up the shared database in ComAdmin.
5. Start the server. To do any of the following things, the server
must be running in the shared database defined in the
previous step.
6. Set permissions. Commence Workgroup Information
Manager has many different permissions that you can set
per database and per user to restrict what they can see and
what they can do in the shared database. Commence will
use the default values unless you change them.
7. Set communications settings. Each user of Commence can
synchronize their data with the server using either a shared
LAN directory or e-mail. You must tell the server what
method each client will be using.
8. Register clients with the database. You must tell the server
what users are to be clients of the shared database. This will
create a link between the clients and the server.
9. Install the client software. Each client can install the client
software themselves, but you must make sure it is properly
installed. If it is not, they may have problems with their
Commence Workgroup.
10. Enroll to the shared database. Enrolling to a shared
database will bring a copy of the shared database locally to
the client. This process involves running the Enroll Wizard,
entering a special authorization key, and some
communication parameters.
What's New in Commence RM?
Commence RM is designed with two objectives in mind. First, to
ensure that the software remains compatible with changes to
current versions of Microsoft Office and Windows Operating
Systems. These changes are not always visible to the end user,
but are critical to protect the investment and usability of the
software.
Secondly is to enhance the functionality and utilization of the
software. These modifications are traditionally driven by our global
customer base who periodically interacts with our product
management staff and makes recommendations for future
enhancements. We appreciate their initiative and invite all
customers to reach out to us with any recommendations you may
have for future enhancements.
The new features are summarized below.
 
 
Commence Email Dropbox
One of the core enhancements in RM 8.0 provides better integration
with Microsoft Office 365 and Google Mail for logging of e-mails. A
new Email Dropbox feature allows users to log emails by simply
forwarding them to a configured email address, such as
crm@mycompany.com. Commence can be configured to check this
inbox and automatically download and log any emails that are
received.
 
Report writer Improvements for Adobe PDF
Use the built-in Commence Report writer to create interactive forms
in PDF format.
Use the full power of the report designer to publish pre-configured
and ready to fill AcroForms.
 
Customize Database confirms Updates and Deletes
This improvement notifies the Commence administrator when
making changes or deletions of the Application design, including
views, agents, fields, and more.
For example, when removing a field from the application, Commence
shows an alert and documents any dependencies such as views or
agents that use this field. This makes it safer and easier to update
and modernize your application without causing unintended
changes.
 
Image fields support more image formats
The Commence application database provides the Image field and
allows for the application to store images with each record, such as a
contact’s profile picture or a picture of a real estate listing. This
image field has been enhanced to support most common image
formats such as JPEG, GIF and more.
 
Agent documentation in System info
Provides an improved System Info screen including an Agents listing
that can be exported to a file for review or printing.
 
Social Integration
Integration with popular social search sites will allow the user to
search for contact information on sites like Twitter, LinkedIn and
Facebook. This feature provides the ability to add social links within
Commence RM and navigate to a social user’s profile.
 
Commence Mobilelink Add-on
Want to synchronize your calendar and contacts from Commence to
your Smartphone?
Well now you can. Commence includes our Mobilelink software, a
plugin software component that synchronizes data with MS Outlook
and Google.
 
Office 2016 Styles
Commence RM includes new styles to modernize the application
look and feel.
 
Report Writer
The built-in report writer has been updated to include the latest
Active Reports features, allowing you to create more informative
and analytical types of reports as required by your business.
Of course all your existing reports will continue to be supported,
preserving your investment in your current application reports. Now
supports creating reports including charts, tables, calendars, and
mapping.
 
Integration with Cloud Based File Storage and Sharing
Systems
Commence applications often include attached files, for example
logging letters, logging emails, attached project and sales
documents, and many other purposes. While Commence
Workgroup includes file sharing features that allow attached files
to be shared among clients, cloud-based file sharing services offer
enhanced functionality and easier access from anywhere and from
any device. Commence RM will allow these cloud-based files to
be used as file attachments in your Commence application.
This means that you can store and access files directly in the cloud
instead of storing them locally on a desktop computer, making it
easier to share files with other users and access them from multiple
devices.
 
Integration with Third Party Marketing Programs
The Commence RM software includes email marketing features
that allows you to send bulk emails to your customers and
contacts using the “Connect for Email” application and your own
email server.
In RM 6.1, we have extended this capability and will support
integration with popular cloud based e-mail marketing services such
as MailChimp and Constant Contact. The Connect for Email
application will enable you to upload your contact list from
Commence RM and send bulk emails through these email services.
In addition, you will be able to access email marketing reports
directly from within the Connect for Email application. Common
reports include details about campaigns that were sent, which emails
were opened, and which were deleted allowing you to better
understand the effectiveness of your email marketing campaigns.
 
Microsoft Office 64-bit support
Commence RM includes support for 64-bit editions of Microsoft
Office, including top used features such as mail merge letters and
email logging. With support for both 32-bit and 64-bit Office
versions, Commence allows you to use the Office version you
require, removing any extra implementation work to install 32-bit
Office versions.
 
Macros for unsupported word processors have also been removed
from the installer.
 
Spell Checker
The built-in Spell Check feature has been improved to work with
64-bit versions of Windows, as requested by many of our
customers. The feature has been rebuilt using a modern spell
check engine that also includes support for multiple languages
and dictionaries.
 
Modern Tabbed Dialog Boxes
The most frequently used dialog box screens in Commence have
been updated with a modern look and feel, making them easier to
navigate and use. In addition, these new screens can be resized
allowing more information to be displayed on larger desktop
screens.
 
Save View as File
The Save View as HTML command has been replaced with a
more versatile Save View as File command. A quick export is now
available by choosing either Create CSV or Create HTML. The
Create CSV command instantly saves a comma separated (CSV)
file format that can be imported directly to Microsoft Excel or
uploaded to online web services, such as email marketing
services. Similarly, the Create HTML command saves your view
with a single click to HTML format. The formatted HTML option is
still available using the Create HTML Wizard command.
 
 
Redesigned Filter Summary
Setting the search criteria for reports and views is easier than ever
using the new Filters window. The summary page now shows all 8
filters on a single page. Filters can also be drag and dropped from
positions 1-4 to 5-8 as per earlier designs. This allows you to quickly
move filters or clone filters as needed to change the Boolean logic of
your query.
 
 
Security Improvements
Security has been improved by incorporating the latest secure
features for email and FTP.
 
How to get the new version
 
Commence RM is a Windows desktop version that can be
installed on premises or in a web-hosted environment. Customers
with an Internet connection may download the update directly
using the Check for Updates command found on the Help menu.
The online update feature is a service available at no additional
cost to customers on a current maintenance plan. Installation CDs
are available upon request.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Includes Features from Previous Releases
This release includes all the new features and enhancements to
the product's user interface introduced in Commence RM 3.5 , RM
3.5.1, RM 3.6, RM 4.0, RM 4.1, and RM 5.0. A summary of the
feature highlights are listed below. Contact Technical Support for
more detailed information.
 
Commence RM 5.0
Database Capacities
Database capacity increase to allow up to 250 fields per
category (increased from 100 fields).
View icon labels allow 50 characters (increased from 10
characters)
Calculation field changes to support the new database
format
Database Backup tool updated to support data folders
larger than 2Gb
Resolved progress bar issues with Database Restore tool
for backup (*.xfr) files larger than 1Gb
Microsoft Office 365 and 2013
Installer improvements to better support Word macro
installation for Office 365
Resolved issues with Excel charting feature in Office 2013
Improved Word Mail Merge macros to better support
merging special character in connected item fields (i.e.,
large text field with carriage returns)
Report Writer
Updated to latest version of Active Reports
Conversion utility has been improved to handle
mismatched fields when upgrading existing report viewers.
Resolved error in creating new report viewer with all fields
in the category.
Unconverted reports can continue to be used indefinitely.
Grid Views & Multi-views
Resolved grid view focus issue when a detail form is
closed; highlight no longer moves to first record.
Grid now supports copy function (CTRL + C) to clipboard.
Resolved multi-view focus issue; no longer requires click
to begin using prefix matching.
Miscellaneous
Outlook Connect Email Add-In updated to use newer
version of Visual Studio
Mobile Link Add-In updated to better handle trivial updates
to Notes during synchronization with Outlook.
Increased default size for ACTIVE.LOG to capture more
activity.
Resolved read-only file permissions issue with
COMMENCE.INI on Windows 7 (64-bit).
Improved performance of Delete All Items command.
Commence RM 4.1
Microsoft Office 2013 and Windows 8
Windows 8 installations supported
Updated email integration for logging email in Outlook
2013 (32 bit)
Office 2013 (32 bit) supported for Word mail merges and
other integration features.
Report Writer
New report designer interface including, new toolbar, new
script editor and preview tabs, and toolbox properties.
New chart control to insert bar, pie and line charts
New report viewer features including Continuous scrolling
and Annotation
Conversion utility to easily update existing report viewers
to the new format. Unconverted reports can continue to be
used indefinitely.
Grid View
Redesigned grid view for improved performance and
user interface.
New tool tip pop-up to improve visibility of truncated cells.
Reposition columns on-the-fly with simple drag and drop.
Workgroup Expert Report
Client sync status summary chart appears before detailed
recommendation text.
Client workgroup ID numbers appear in workgroup
summary and client sync status charts for easier
troubleshooting.
Installation
Default installation for 'All Users' no longer requires
Windows Administrator rights.
Program settings previously saved to the Windows
Registry (HKLM) are moved to COMMENCE.INI file.
'Current User' installations are unchanged and
continue to be saved in the Windows Registry
(HKCU).
Database settings previously saved to the Windows
Registry (HKLM) are moved to DATABASE.INI file.
Outlook Add-in updated to read/write to INI file instead of
the Windows Registry.
Miscellaneous
Larger windows for Open Manage Views, Send Letter, and
Workgroup Assign Users dialog boxes
Ribbon and Quick access toolbar improvement for Agents
Graphical charts can now be added to the Dashboard.
Resolved window focus issues during Dashboard refresh.
Commence RM 4.0
Microsoft Office 2010 and Windows 7
Windows 7 installations supported
Ongoing development and improvements to support 64-bit
operating systems. Commence installs and runs as a 32-
bit application in 64-bit Windows OS.
Updated email integration for Outlook 2007 and Outlook
2010.
Office 2010 (Word, Excel) supported for the various
integration features, including mail merges and Excel
graphs of sales opportunity data.
Ribbon
All new Ribbon replaces the Menu bar. Note: For ease of
explaining the new features, the terms ribbon and menu
will be used interchangeably.
Commence Application button intuitively presents
application-related commands to manage the active
database, open a different database, or exit the
application.
Ribbon can be minimized to increase workspace area.
Opens when clicked, collapses when not in use.
New Aero-style icons for menu commands that were
previously not featured prominently, such as Outlook sync
and Schedule Meeting.
Quick Access Toolbar
Customizable Quick access toolbar is provided for all your
frequently used commands.
Always on top for anytime/anywhere access.
Each user in a workgroup can individually personalize
his/her quick access toolbar.
Right-click on any object in the ribbon, then choose 'Add
to Quick Access Toolbar'
Launch menu commands, toolbar agents, menu agents,
even views!
Everything you need in the smallest space possible.
Minimize the ribbon and work entirely off the quick access
toolbar.
Key Tips
With the elimination of cascading menus, most commands
are now accessible with fewer keystrokes.
Hold the ALT key, press the letter for the menu tab, then
press the letters shown in the Key Tip over the feature that
you want to use.
Backwards compatibility for common keyboard shortcuts
from prior versions of Commence (e.g. CTRL+P still Prints
the active view).
In-Ribbon Galleries
Home menu is visible as soon as the application opens,
and displays a gallery of graphical icons for each
command.
Built-in command toolbar and user-defined agent toolbar
reside on the Home menu.
Complementary features have been grouped together. For
example: Global Search, Find, Find & Replace are now
found in the Search group on the Edit menu.
Commands to manage views (open, save, view as) and
arrange view windows (tile, cascade) have been
consolidated into a single core tab -- the View menu.
Enhanced tooltips appear when hovering over a gallery
icon. Tooltips briefly explain the command and give the
shortcut keys.
Visit the Reference book of this online help for a handy
chart of all menu commands and keyboard shortcuts.
Dashboard
Dashboard page provides an overview of your key
Commence information similar to Outlook Today.
Ready-to-use portals display your Calendar, Contacts, and
Task list from Commence
Contacts list also serves as an index to quickly access the
selected contact's profile on LinkedIn and Twitter.
Ability to create your own portals to display data from your
custom Commence category
Integrates with your MAPI mail client configured in
Preferences to display the number of messages in the
Inbox, Outbox, and Drafts folders.
Dashboard can be viewed as (1) a separate document
view within Commence, (2) a secondary tab within the
Contacts multiview, or (3) an external web page running
outside of Commence.
Social Networking
Social Networking page of the Dashboard features three
integrated portals: Contacts list, Contact Details window,
and Social Network window.
Selecting a Contact in the list displays that contact's
details in the second window.
In the Contact Details window, three new icons are used to
interact with the social networking sites. Clicking on any of
the three populates the corresponding social network
details in the third window.
Twitter button displays the selected Contact's Twitter
profile. Tweets button displays recent messages left by the
individual on their Twitter page.
Google and Smart Phone synchronization
Mobile Link features direct synchronization with Google's
web-based applications for managing Calendar
appointments, Contacts, and Tasks.
Enables Web browser access to your calendar, contacts,
and tasks from anywhere you have Internet access
Use any web-enabled device to access your Commence
data via Google, including desktops, smart phones, and
even the latest Apple iPad.
Mobile Link also supports two-way syncs with most of the
smart phones available today, including iPhone, iPad,
BlackBerry, Android, Palm WebOS (Pre and Pixi),
Windows Mobile, and Symbian S60 devices.
Workgroup synchronization
Monitor your workgroup client right at the desktop level
using enhanced Help menu features.
Help-System Information command display additional
Workgroup information such as date of last sync, exact
number of changes behind, and specific sync points.
Message Log Info button, found on the Home menu and
also the Help menu, displays up to the minute alerts on
the Ribbon
White Message Log icon indicates a normal state and let's
you know with confidence that you have received all
updates from the Commence Server database.
Yellow, Orange, and Red icons indicate varying degrees of
alert conditions, i.e. how far behind or how long it's been
since your last synchronization.
Warning thresholds can be adjusted to meet your
company's requirements, alerting you based on a certain
number of days or hours, or a certain number of changes.
Outlook Email Logging
Commence add-in updates include better support for
Microsoft Exchange, Outlook 2007 and Outlook 2010.
New Aero-style Log button for the Add-ins menu better
integrates with the Outlook Ribbon for a more seamless
look.
Calendar
Week numbers are a new feature prominently displayed
for each week in the mini-month calendars for Day, 2 Day,
Week, 2 Weeks, Month, and 6 Weeks format.
'All Day Events' and 'Untimed' appointments are now
displayed in their own row when using the Send command
on the Home menu to send you calendar to an email
recipient.
Corrected calibration issues with using Right click on a
calendar to add a new appointment on the selected date.
Repaired minor issue in Calendar views which listed the
incorrect calendar display mode (2 Day) when actually
viewing Day mode.
Improved Calendar printing to better handle monthly
calendar views that span six weeks
Mini-month dates are shown in bold text when
appointments are added to that date.
Miscellaneous
Continued support for custom high-resolution icons when
designing Agent toolbar shortcuts for the Ribbon and
Quick access toolbar.
Added support for colon (:) character in view names when
using the Send command on the Home menu to send a
view to an email recipient.
Commence RM 3.6
New Styles and Icons
Personalize your view bar, tool bar, and desktop with all
new style choices (found under Preferences - Tool Bars).
The various styles give a polished look to the Commence
windows and tool bars by altering subtle details such as
the title bar colors, window borders, view bar and tool bar
background color, rounded edges vs square edges for
view windows, and other visual attributes. 
Choices
include Office 2007, Windows Vista, Windows Vista
(Black) for a monochrome look, Windows XP Luna, and
Windows XP Royal.
High resolution icons replace the previous command bar
buttons along the top of the Commence window (Drag &
Drop, Print, Design View, Sort View, etc.).
Number (0 - 9) icons have been added to the icon library
for use with view bar and tool bar buttons.
Existing view bar icons have all be converted to high
resolution full color images and standardized to 16x16 and
32x32 sizes for small and large icons respectively.
Custom high resolution icons stored in an external
directory can now be used as Agent tool bar buttons in
addition to saved view bar buttons.
Calendar
Calendar has been redesigned to echo the styling of the
Microsoft Outlook calendar.
More at-a-glance features provide information such as the
day of week above the time slots in Day format, and
showing the short date before each week for 2 Weeks,
Month, and 6 Weeks format.
Browse buttons now appear on dates with no appointment
to quickly view the date of your next or previous
appointment.
Expanded display area at top of day planner for
appointments with no specific start time
Calendars now support WYSIWYG printing.
Week numbers are now displayed near the mini months
on Calendar printouts.
Better drag & drop support for Calendars within multi-
views. Quickly reschedule appointments, extend meeting
times, and more.
Views
Multi-views now have the option of displaying the view
icon next to the tab name. Icons are selected in the Save
View As dialog when creating or modifying the secondary
view.
Color Code Template colors have been updated to offer
lighter background color choices while still retaining some
of the deeper colors which are the preferred choice for text
color coding.
Usability Enhancements
Natural date language now supports simplified phrases
such as 'beginning of next month', where 'the beginning of
next month' previously required.
More custom views can now be saved. Database capacity
has been increased from 1000 to 2000 for the maximum
number of views per database.
Calendar color coding has been turned off by default to
maintain expected view appearances in upgraded
databases. Please review your color code templates in
converted databases to verify the appropriate colors are
selected for foreground vs background use.
Miscellaneous
Calendar Design view settings have been updated to
support the redesigned calendar view options. Calendar
preferences dialog has also been updated to remove
obsolete options for day planner printing. Calendar Image
format and corresponding image packs are no longer
available.
Select Items window is no longer accessible by double-
clicking on a date header in calendars.
Improved detail form performance by resolving GDI
memory usage issue.
Improved multi-view performance with better caching.
Resolved application error when configuring workgroup
permissions dialog for more than 50 desktops and
categories.
Commence Outlook Address Book installation issue has
been resolved.
Commence RM 3.5
Office 07 and Vista support
Installs and runs on Vista 32-bit operating system
Updated letter macros for Word 2007
Excel 2007 support for analytic charts to measure sales
performance
Automatic Updates
Built-in command checks for new program updates
No CD required. Downloads and installs updates directly
to your computer
Automated Business Processes
New business work flow plug-in for managing your
customer list
Integrate with your calendar or to-do list to ensure timely
follow-ups
Drip marketing, service and sales automation examples
included in tutorial
Simple, wizard-driven screens for creating your own
processes
Installation
Additional user guides are added to the Windows Start
menu for easy access
Viewbar is updated to support tablet PC input and other
accessibility options on Windows Vista
Commence Address Book service is available for
installation into Microsoft Outlook
Clearer messages are displayed during online activation of
the server
International
Date fields have been updated to support all regional short
date and long date formats when set using agent
keywords
New keyword (-LongDate-) inserts the regional long date
format for use in agents and letter templates
Changed keyword (-Date-) to insert the regional short date
format for use in agents and letter templates
Regional currency and date formats are preserved when
sending letter with Microsoft Word
Calendar updated to support regional date and time
options as set in Windows Control Panel
Workgroup
Progress bar during workgroup synchronization displays
estimated remaining work to complete synchronization
Large number of categories is now supported when setting
user access rights to data
Switching to a new default detail form is now synchronized
independently of other form changes
Increased fault tolerance for brief internet connection
outages. Automatically resumes file upload/download.
Long connection names are displayed in their entirety on
the sync progress message box
Resolves intermittent application error with open forms
during background synchronization
Toolbar is now refreshed properly to show alert status of
Message log button when synchronization is off
FTP Synchronization Enhancements
Extra allowance for intermittent FTP connectivity
Automatically retries the send/receive of data if the initial
connection is not successful
Support for Internet Explorer 7.0
LAN Synchronization Enhancements
Automatically retries the send/receive of data if the initial
connection is not successful
Synchronization status reports
New HTML format for Workgroup Expert report is easier to
read
Color coding spotlights specific users so you can quickly
determine who is not synchronizing
Now shows exact number of changes behind in addition to
percentages for a more accurate assessment
Multi-View Enhancements
New highlighting scheme for the active row in the active
window
Switching to a different pane in the multi-view moves the
active highlight to the new window
Remembers the last selection in the inactive window and
greys out the inactive row
Facilitates using tool bar buttons, mail merges, and other
features that require an item to be selected
Updated Contact Manager Application
Enhanced Opportunity module supports multiple product
Forecasts
Clean and modern look for main data entry screens
Advanced sub-reports gather data across multiple
categories in a single report
New Look
Microsoft Office style View Bar and Tool Bars provide a
consistent look and feel with the Windows desktop and
other Windows applications
New View Bar can now be docked permanently or
removed from the desktop
New default icons for standard view types
Additional icon selections for View Bar buttons
Improved viewbar displays more desktop tabs and view
icons
Viewbar size and layout is preserved for each database
Viewbar icons are refreshed properly when opening
desktop with missing wallpaper file
Viewbar icons are refreshed properly when switching
desktop during workgroup sync
Viewbar icons are refreshed properly after cancelling
prompt to save view changes
Desktop with no wallpaper is displayed properly after
opening desktop with wallpaper
Desktop name now supports and displays special
ampersand character
Views
Grid view in locked mode no longer allows characters to
be erased using Delete key
Pick-list items in multi-view filtering toolbar are sorted
properly
Grid view toolbar now wraps when view is resized
Resolves intermittent application error when reopening a
minimized calendar view
Windows control buttons (minimize/restore/close) are
displayed properly for maximized calendar view
Calendar view is enhanced to support resizing view to
narrow width
Miscellaneous
Audible beep suppressed when closing detail form using
Enter key with cursor on connection field
Resolves application error when cancelling from Select
Database menu when launching Commence
Microsoft Excel (XLS) files are displayed properly in the
public library of Connect for E-mail
 
 
Error Message Index
The following is a list of all the error messages you might see
while using Commence. They are listed by number, the same
number displayed in parentheses in the message window when
the error occurs. You can use this number to look up a message
in this list and select the number of the message below to see a
help topic on that message.
 
Note that you can press F1 when the error message is displayed
by Commence (i.e., when the error occurs) to see the same help
topic.
 
100 This category contains items with duplicate names.
'Allow Duplicate Names' may not be unchecked while
this is true.
101 <Category name> is an invalid category name.
102 A category with a recurring date field must allow
duplicate names.
103 This data directory contains categories which allow
more items than this version of Commence supports.
Commence will now exit.
104 Invalid entry, please try again.
110 You cannot delete the Item Name field.
111 Replacing the text will exceed the field's maximum size. Text
cannot be replaced.
112 The default string's length is greater than the field's
size. You must reduce the size of the default string.
113 The default selection must have a label. Change the
default or add a label.
114 Add another radio button. You must define at least two
buttons.
115 You cannot delete selections from existing fields.
119 Enter a whole number that is zero or greater for this
field.
121 The reserved word [Save, Cancel] cannot be used as
a field name. Please enter a new field name.
122 Multiple radio buttons have the same name. Make
each name unique.
123 The maximum number of characters cannot be
greater than 30,000.
125 This equation has an unrecognized field name,
operator or delimiter. Please correct the equation
before proceeding.
126 Please enter a whole number between 1 and <8> for
'Buttons Per Row'.
129 There is a maximum of one Sequence number field
per category. Delete any extra sequence number
fields.
130 The formula entered is too long. It cannot be saved.
131 There is a maximum of one recurring date field per
category. Deselect this option from all but one date
field.
132 Enter an initial sequence number less than
2,000,000,000.
133 The formula for the calculation field <field name>
contains a field name that is no longer valid. Delete
this calculation field or change its formula.
140 Select a 'From' item and ‘To’ item before continuing.
141 Internal error during connection initialization - call
technical support.
142 Give the connections different names.
144 There is not enough room to add this connection to
the <category name> category.
145 Warning for category <category name>: If you edit the
name of or delete this connection, recurring items will
no longer be associated and cannot be edited or
deleted in a group.
147 The connection <connection name> is reserved for
connecting recurring items. Commence creates this
connection automatically when recurring items are
added. Rename this connection or cancel this
operation.
150 This field cannot be removed from the detail form
because it is the name field or it is a mandatory field
without a default value.
152 The detail form cannot be deleted since it is the only
one defined for this category.
153 There are no attributes to set for this field type.
154 Enter a valid width greater than 0 and no more than
250 characters.
155 Enter a valid height greater than 0 and no more than
50 lines.
156 Enter a valid number for the visible size that is greater
than 0 but does not exceed 20 inches or 50.8
centimeters.
157 Add at least one field to this form before saving it.
163 Warning: Incoming E-Mail will not be processed since
no E-Mail program has been configured. Select Edit-
Preferences-Other Apps to add E-Mail information.
164 Select appropriate date/time fields before continuing.
165 The limit of <number> Tool Bar Pick agents per
database has been reached. Either select a different
trigger for this agent, or deactivate other Tool Bar Pick
agents.
166 Define at least one trigger and one action before
saving this agent.
167 A trigger must be defined before you can define a
condition or an action.
168 Before continuing, please provide [Menu Text, a DDE
Message, Status Bar Message Text, a Message, an
Application path name, all requested information, a
path name, a path].
169 Select a view before continuing.
170 This action requires a trigger/condition selection with
only one selected category.
171 You entered an invalid number of items. Enter a
number from 0 to 500000 before continuing.
172 This command requires you to highlight an item in the
<category name> category.
173 Cannot save the actions. Each button label and
corresponding action must be defined in pairs.
174 Please enter the required value before continuing.
175 Select a field before continuing.
176 The Agent Tool Bar position you have chosen is
already in use or the Tools Menu is full. The agent
cannot be activated.
177 The hotkey for this trigger is already used by the
agent '<agent name>'. Please select a different
hotkey.
178 Before continuing. please provide a valid [date, time,
year, Start Time, End Time, menu text, DDE msg,
status bar msg].
179 Enter between [1 and 60, 0 and 59] minutes before
continuing.
180 Select Print Options before continuing.
181 The ‘Process E-Mail’ action can only be used with the
‘Incoming Communications: E-Mail’ trigger. Please use
the appropriate trigger or select a different action.
182 The limit of 16 Menu Pick agents had been reached.
Either select a different trigger for this agent or
deactivate other Menu Pick agents.
183 This trigger/condition/action requires that at least one
category or view be defined.
184 The field '<field name>' is mandatory and no default
value is available. It cannot be left blank.
185 The field '<field name>' is mandatory and no default
value is available. It cannot be left blank. Select 'Field
Values...' or check 'Display Item(s)' before proceeding.
186 The field '<field name>' does not translate to a valid
field in the <category name> category.
187 Enter a time interval between 0 minutes and 23 hours,
59 minutes.
188 You must check 'added to', 'edited in', or both before
continuing.
193 The maximum number of messages that can be
snoozed has been reached.
194 Enter a valid snooze time between 1 and 999 minutes.
195 Cannot create a Sync Link Out Agent. No remote databases
defined. Use Sync Link Out to add one.
196 Cannot create an [Import or Export] Agent. Use
Customize - Database - Import/Export to add an
[Import or Export] template.
197 Multimedia functions unavailable.
198 Couldn’t open multimedia file: <file name>.
200 Cannot display the legend. Select a color code
template first.
202 The view will not be displayed because a field of type
<field type> was not found in this category.
203 No image packs have been installed.
204 The Time Conflict layout you selected is not valid. Try
again.
205 Couldn't create a default view for the <category
name> category. The maximum number of views may
have been reached.
206 The combined fields exceed the number of fields
allowed by the view. Please remove some fields
before saving.
207 The latest possible start time using this time interval is
<time>.
208 The date, start time or end time field has not been
selected or is invalid for this function. Choose your
selections with the Customize-Design View-Fields
command.
209 A required field was set to '(none)'. The appropriate
default field(s) have been selected.
210 The Calendar layout you selected is not valid. Try
again.
211 Select an item in the calendar. The highlight must be
positioned on the name of the item to select it.
212 Please enter a valid time for the Start Time of the
Calendar.
213 The start date or end date field has not been selected
or is invalid for this function. Choose your selections
with the Customize-Design View-Fields command.
214 The Gantt layout you selected is not valid. Try again.
215 Enter an Indent value greater than or equal to zero
and less than [5.0 inches or 12.7 centimeters].
216 Time Conflict checking requires that the category have
at least one date and one time field. Either edit the
category and add the required fields or select a
different category.
217 The Highlight color must be changed so it is different
from the Background color, otherwise the view
highlight will not be visible.
218 Decrease the field width to between 1 and 150
columns.
219 The field height must be between 1 and 750 lines.
220 Add at least one field to this view before saving it.
221 Enter a valid [horizontal or vertical] spacing between
zero and [5.0 inches or 12.7 centimeters].
225 Vertical reports can have between 1 and 20 columns.
Horizontal reports can have only one column.
229 Connected fields can have a total of 750 lines. The
total you have entered is <number> lines. Either set
the number of instances to <number> or set the field
height to <number>, or simply decrease both values.
230 The number of instances must be between 1 and 750.
232 No more fields can be included in this report. Remove
some fields first if you wish to add others.
233 For connected fields, Commence can only sort on the
Name field in the connected category. You have
selected a connected field that is not the Name field.
234 You have selected a type of field that Commence
cannot sort on. Please select a different field.
240 This file is not in the proper format: '<filename>'.
241 [Backup, Restore] did not complete.
244 The backup file cannot be created in the database
directory. Select a different directory for the backup
file.
245 The [definition] could not be transferred in because
the [definition] was not found in this database.
246 This database is password protected. Make sure you
remember its password because you will need to know
it when it is restored.
247 The file '<filename>' is a backup file and must be
restored using Open/Manage Database - Restore.
248 The file '<filename>' is a transfer file and must be
handled using Transfer In.
249 The file '<filename>' is a sync link file and must be
handled using Sync Link In.
250 The transfer or sync file '<filename> is from a newer version
of Commence and cannot be processed. You must upgrade
to the newer version in order to process this file.
251 The transfer or sync file '<filename>' is from a older version
of Commence and cannot be processed.
260 Could not execute DDE command!
262 Could not communicate with application: <application
name>.
270 Check the export template. It does not match the data.
Commence cannot continue exporting.
271 Define the category <category name> so that
Commence can import the file.
272 Enter a positive number less than 32,767 for the Start
and End positions.
274 Commence cannot save an imported item. The import
will end.
275 Unrecognized format in the import file. Make sure file
is in DIF format.
276 Commence did not find the text delimiter for a field
and cannot import the file.
277 Record <record number>, Field <field name> of this
import file does not map to a field, and Commence
cannot continue importing.
278 There are no items in the export category.
279 Make the 'End Position' greater than the 'Start
Position'.
280 You defined field positions for <field name> that
overlap with those defined for <field name>.
281 Commence cannot save the template. The item name
field must map to an import field.
282 Delete this import template. It is associated with a
category that no longer exists.
283 The specified file is not in the proper format (<file
format>).
284 The dBASE field <field name> cannot be imported
into the Commence field <field name>. They are of
conflicting types.
285 The number of columns in this DIF file (<number>) is
not the same as was given in the import template.
Commence cannot continue importing.
286 Record <number>, Field <number> of this import file
<error condition>. Commence cannot continue
importing.
287 Cannot add more fields. Cannot import from a file with
more than 102 fields.
288 Record <record> is too long to be imported.
289 Record <record>, Field <field> of this import file
<condition>. Commence cannot continue importing.
The field's value is <value>.
290 The maximum number (500000) of items was reached
for this category. Not all records were imported.
291 Import field <field 1>, mapped to Commence field
<field 2>, must be given start and end positions.
294 The number of fields in this file does not match the
number defined in the import template. Cannot import.
295 The Commence mandatory field <field> is not mapped
to an import field and has no default string defined.
Halting import.
296 There were connections to unknown items in the
<category name> category (for example, the item
<item name>.) These connections could not be made.
297 Commence cannot save the template because the
mapping is not valid for this category.
298 Cannot find matching memo file: <filename>.
299 Experienced internal error during import - call
technical support.
300 You cannot delete the active Database.
301 Please enter text for the template before saving.
302 To define a color code, a category must have a check
box, a selection field, or a connection field. The
selected category contains none of these fields.
Please select another category.
303 You have selected an item more than once. Select
unique items.
304 Delete the invalid keyword <keyword> from the letter
template.
305 There is not a data file field in the category <category
name>.
308 Text letter templates are limited to 16000 characters.
You have reached this limit. If you are pasting from the
clipboard, reduce the amount of text being pasted and
try again.
309 Select a category for the phone log.
310 The telephone number format is unrecognized and
cannot be dialed.
311 Commence cannot dial because the phone line is
currently in use. Please try again later when the phone
line is free.
312 Commence cannot add <path> as a database since it
is the <directory type>.
313 You cannot delete the active desktop.
317 The selected Icon Directory is not a valid directory.
Please change the selection with the Edit-
Preferences-Tool Bars command.
318 You must either change the number of digits required
or enter <number> digits.
319 The selected External Data File Directory is not a
valid directory. Please change the selection with the
Edit-Preferences-Other command.
322 TXT is reserved for use with Text Letters only. Enter a
different formatted letter extension.
323 Delete an existing [Agent, Category, Connection,
View, Icon View, Menu View, Field, Template,
Database, Form] before adding another. The
maximum amount has been reached.
324 Please provide a name for the [Category,
Connections, Form, Template, Item, Field, View] .
325 The name for [Agent, Template, View, First
Connection, Second Connection, Import Template,
Database, Item, Form, Field, Category] already exists.
Use a different name.
326 The database <database name> already uses this
path. Use a different path name.
327 In order to schedule a meeting a category (including
date, start time and end time fields) must be selected.
328 The database <database name> already exists. Use a
different name.
329 The desktop <desktop name> already exists. Use a
different name.
330 The item <item name> already exists. Use a different name.
331 The selection <selection name> already exists. Use a
different name.
370 The new password did not verify correctly; please
enter the new password again.
371 Unable to change password, the old password is
incorrect. Please enter the old password again.
372 A password must be set for the database to be
password protected; either turn off the password
checkbox or set a password.
373 Cannot add an item. No categories have been
defined.
374 Cannot save User Item information. No item selected.
375 Cannot save User Item information in a database with
no categories.
400 Enter a value for the filter.
401 The view <view name> cannot be used as a primary
view since it does not have connections to other active
views. Select a different primary view, try linking by
date or start an appropriate secondary view.
402 The filter for view <view name> cannot be modified to
link the views. Clear the filter and try again.
403 The category <category name> does not have any
Date fields and cannot be linked by date. Select a
different secondary view or try linking by connection.
404 One of your filters is set to 'OR (All Items)'. This will
cause all items to be selected regardless of the
settings of any other filters. Please select the
summary tab and change the AND/OR relationship to
make your filter work.
405 Enter the search text.
406 The two views are already linked. Specify different
views to link or select Cancel.
407 The secondary view must have a date field but there
are no active views with date fields. Start a secondary
view that has a date field or use the ‘Connected to
highlighted item’ option.
408 Please enter a valid telephone number.
409 Invalid field value specified, could not process <>.
410 There is no item to copy.
411 The maximum number (500000) of items has been
reached for category <category name>. You must
delete an existing item before adding a new one.
412 The date <date field> is not valid.
413 The recognizer is busy. Try again later.
414 The default value entered is not valid for this field. Try
again.
415 Can't display this item.
416 Please enter a valid Start and End date before
continuing.
418 The 'Related Recurring' connection could not be
added for this category. You must either delete a field
or a connection before recurring date items in this
category can be associated.
420 No items were added. No actual dates match the
recurring date specification.
421 You can only send letters from a book view, a report
view or while editing a previously saved item.
422 There is no window open, so no letter can be sent.
423 Commence cannot log this letter. Select a log
category first using Edit-Preferences-Event Logs.
424 There are no letter templates defined for this category.
You can define letter templates using Customize-
Database-Letter Template.
425 Commence cannot save the letter. Make sure you
have selected a valid directory for saving logged
letters using Edit-Preferences-Event Logs.
426 This view has been modified. You must save the view
in order to print letters to all with a formatted text
template.
429 One Item Per Region must be set for layouts that
contain multiple regions.
431 This page layout is too <narrow/wide/short/tall> for
this type of view. Select a
<wider/narrower/shorter/taller> layout.
433 Enter page width and height values greater than zero.
434 You have not selected a printer. Choose 'Printer
Setup' from the Home menu in order to print.
435 Enter region width and height values greater than
zero.
436 Reduce the internal margins to fit in the region width
and height.
437 Enter a number between 1 and 100 for the number of
copies.
438 Enter a starting label number greater than zero.
439 Enter a 'To' date that is after the 'From' date.
440 Enter valid dates for the 'From' and ‘To’ fields.
442 Commence will not begin printing. There is no way to
cancel the print job.
443 An error occurred while printing. Check the printer.
446 Reduce the page margins or region sizes to fit in the
page width and height.
447 This is the default page layout. It cannot be deleted
(change the default to a different page layout before
deleting this layout).
448 Invalid label template or improper paper size. Check
the settings and try again.
449 Could not locate at least one font with a size of 8, 10,
or 12 points.
450 There aren't enough lines with the available fonts to
print within the Commence margins. Reduce the top or
bottom margins to allow more space.
451 There is not enough disk space for print spooling.
452 The starting label number should be between 1 and
<number>.
453 This view cannot print using One Item Per Region.
Change the layout template or print from a report view.
454 This view can only print in multiple regions using One
Item Per Region. Change the layout template.
500 Select from the list first.
501 Enter a valid whole number.
502 Enter a whole number greater than zero.
503 The End [Date or Time] cannot be sooner than the
Start [Date or Time].
504 COMMDLG.DLL returned error code <error code>.
Commence cannot continue the current operation.
505 Enter a valid file name.
506 A data conversion error was encountered while
processing '<database name>‘ (error code <error
code>). Data converter '<converter name>‘ cannot
continue.
507 Data conversion initialization failed. Data conversion
cannot complete (initial database version - final
database version).
508 The path entry must not be blank. Enter a valid path
specification or use the Select button to locate one.
509 Data converter [converter name] is an incompatible
version (expected: [version number], actual: [version
number]). Data conversion cannot continue.
510 Please enter a number between 1 and 30000,
inclusive.
511 The specified directory name does not exist. Please
enter a new directory name.
512 Directory '<directory name>' already exists.
513 Cannot find file <filename>; check to ensure the path
and filename are correct.
514 An error was encountered while re-indexing database
<database name>. Commence will now exit.
515 Please enter a valid file extension before saving.
516 Incorrect password. Try again or select Cancel.
517 The database <database name> is invalid. Please
select another database.
518 The database <database name> is currently locked.
Either it is being accessed by another user or was
improperly closed. Please wait five minutes or select
another database.
519 The Tutorial database is currently being accessed by
another copy of Commence. Tutorial mode is not
available.
520 The [Windows directory, Windows System directory,
Commence Program directory, Commence Tutorial
directory, root directory, DOS directory] cannot be
used; select another directory.
521 Cannot change to this Database. It no longer exists.
Create the directory or delete this database entry.
522 An error was encountered while converting database
'%s'. Commence will now exit.
523 Invalid or unrecognized database specified
(<database name>); Commence will now exit.
524 Commence is unable to open the Database selected
because of low disk space. Free up at least <space>
on drive <drive> and try again.
525 The data in the specified database requires a newer
version of Commence to be used.
526 Commence cannot find the Tutorial files. Tutorial
mode will not be available.
527 The tutorial.cmp file could not be found. New tutorial
data will not be loaded.
528 The file <filename> contains nonprintable characters
and can not be pasted.
529 Cannot paste the entire file. The file may be too large
to paste here.
530 No telephone number is available for this operation.
531 Invalid or unrecognized command line option detected
(<command line option>); it will be ignored.
532 The data in the specified database requires a special
version of Commence. Please contact your vendor.
533 This type of window cannot be [filtered, arranged,
sorted, printed].
534 The 'CONVERT.LOG' file in the database directory will
have more information about the error(s) that were
encountered. To recover the original database use the
backup file created earlier.
535 Data conversion encountered an error while writing
data to disk. Free up some disk space and try again.
You will need to restore the original data using the
backup file created earlier.
536 '<database name>' is a partially converted database
from an earlier data conversion attempt. Restore the
original data from backup and try again. If you are
having difficulty converting your data please contact
technical support for assistance.
537 '<database name>' is an unsupported version and
cannot be converted. Restore the original data from
backup and try again. If you are having difficulty
converting your data please contact technical support
for assistance. (<conversion name>)
538 No windows are available for [sort, filter, layout, print,
tile, cascade].
539 Please enter a valid directory name before proceeding.
540 The <database name> database is locked and cannot be
used with this version of Commence.
543 There is nothing to delete.
544 The '<field name>' field is full; additional data cannot
be pasted in.
545 The '<field name>' field is full; pasted data was
truncated.
546 The view '<view name>' is filtered by the User Item.
The User Item is not defined. Use Edit-Preferences-
Personal Info to define it.
547 Commence Internal Error.
548 Commence cannot dial a phone number in a
connected field.
549 The data in <database> is from an earlier version of
Commence and cannot be used with this version of
Commence. The data can be converted to work properly with
this version of Commence, contact your vendor or technical
support for information.
550 There is not enough memory available for this
operation.
571 Commence cannot obtain a system timer. Commence
will now exit.
575 Close a window. There are too many open windows.
576 You need to select a printer in order for printer fonts to
be available.
577 Select an item from the Font Name list.
578 Select or enter a valid font size greater than 0 points
and no more than 255 points.
579 Windows Telephony services have been disabled,
dialing is not available.
580 The Windows Telephony driver encountered an error.
Commence cannot continue dialing.
581 This image was stored under Windows for Pens, and
cannot be read with this version of Windows. Use
Windows for Pens to display the image.
582 This image was stored under a newer version of
Windows, and cannot be read with this version of
Windows. Use the new version of Windows to display
the image.
583 This image was stored under an older version of
Windows, and cannot be read with this version of
Windows.
584 There is not enough memory to perform spell
checking.
590 There is no [Extensions] information in WIN.INI for file
'<file name>'.
594 Commence cannot find configuration data in
COMMENCE.INI. Commence will now exit.
595 The database information in DATABASE.INI is missing
or invalid. Commence will now exit.
596 Windows Telephony is not installed or is configured
improperly. Use the Control Panel Telephone applet to
configure. Commence cannot continue dialing.
597 Commence is unable to start application for
'<application name>'. (Windows returned error code
<error code>.)
598 Windows Telephony is not available with this version of
Windows
600 <item>: Not <action>.
606 Unable to open '<filename>'.
607 Unable to open ‘<filename>’. The disk currently in drive
‘<drive letter>’ might be disk number ‘<number>’.
611 Unable to create '<directory name/filename>'.
612 '<directory name>' is an invalid directory name.
613 Unable to read '<filename>'.
623 Unable to write ‘<filename>‘.
633 There is no image to copy to a file.
634 There is a disk error. Commence cannot copy the
image to a file.
635 This type of image cannot be copied to a file.
636 Commence cannot continue importing due to an error;
please check the available disk space.
637 Commence cannot continue importing because of a
disk error on the file <filename>.
638 There is a disk error on the file '<filename>'.
Commence cannot continue exporting.
639 Unable to delete ‘<directory name/filename>‘.
640 There is a disk error. Commence RM cannot copy the
view to the HTML file.
643 Commence cannot find the file '<filename>' on the
disk.
644 Commence cannot load the file '<filename>'. It or one
of its components was not found on the disk.
645 Commence cannot load the program '<program
name>'. Be sure that it is installed correctly.
646 Insufficient disk space on drive %s to complete this
operation. Free up at least <number> bytes of disk
space and try again.
647 Warning: Data disk space is below <size>. To reclaim
disk space, delete or archive any unused categories or
remove any non-Commence files from your <drive
letter> disk drive.
648 Commence was unable to delete the directory
'<directory name>'.
649 Commence cannot access the directory '<directory
name>'.
650 The directory '<directory name>' is empty or no longer
exists.
651 Unexpected end of file on input file '<filename>'.
652 The input file '<filename>' is an invalid file type.
653 The input sync file '<filename>' is invalid for the
current database.
660 Spell-checker Error - Word Not Found
661 Spell-checker Error - No Data Available
662 Spell-checker Error - No Aid Available
663 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Word Construction
664 Spell-checker Error - Too Many Dictionaries Open
665 Spell-checker Error - Dictionary is Not Updateable
666 Spell-checker Error - Updateable Dictionary Full
667 Spell-checker Error - Duplicate Dictionary
668 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Dictionary Name
669 Spell-checker Error - Bad Dictionary
670 Spell-checker Error - LEXAM Not Initialized
671 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Function
672 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Token in Dictionary List
673 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Word
674 Spell-checker Error - Illegal Input Flag Combination
675 Spell-checker Error - Missing or Illegal Value in
Parameter Area
676 Spell-checker Error - Passback Too Small
677 Spell-checker Error - Filename Not Allowed for
Updateable Dictionary
678 Spell-checker Error - Illegal Number of Dictionaries
679 Spell-checker Error - LEXAM Busy
680 Spell-checker Error - Memory Allocation Error
681 Spell-checker Error - File Not Found
682 Spell-checker Error - Path Not Found
683 Spell-checker Error - File Open Failed
684 Spell-checker Error - File Access Denied
685 Spell-checker Error - File Sharing Violation
686 Spell-checker Error - General File I/O Error
690 No spelling mistakes were found.
691 The spell-checker cannot locate the spelling
dictionary, <dictionary name>.
692 There was a system error in the spell-checker.
693 You may spell check only text fields.
800 Could not send e-mail, no mail programs are available.
Select Edit-Preferences-Other Apps to add e-mail
information.
801 E-mail services are not available; JJMAIL32.DLL not found or
wrong version.
802 Could not send e-mail. An error occurred while interacting
with your e-mail program.
803 No web browser detected. Please install an Internet browser
program and try again.
804 Could not launch web browser. An error occurred while
interacting with your browser program.
805 An error occurred during synchronization with Outlook.
Check the Message Log for more information.
806 Synchronization with Outlook was cancelled.
807 Microsoft Outlook could not be loaded; verify that the
required version of Outlook is installed.
808 Could not logon to Microsoft Outlook; verify that your
email preferences are set correctly.
809 The Outlook integration services could not be loaded.
810 The Outlook preferences should be configured using
the Edit-Preferences-Other Apps dialog before using
this command.
920 View '<view name>' cannot use color code '<color
code template name>' (wrong category).
921 Transfer error: <error condition>
1016 This database is not empty and may not be used as
a remote database.
1030 The remote database must have a unique name.
1031 A remote database must be selected; if a remote
database is not defined, use the Add button to create
one.
1036 SyncLink error: Accessing admin files failed.
1037 SyncLink error: disk write to output file or temporary
directory failed.
1038 SyncLink error: reading or writing the database data files
failed.
1039 SyncLink error: this stand-alone database must be used
with a SyncLink file containing an initial sync.
1043 An error was encountered while initializing the database for
SyncLink. SyncLink cannot continue.
Workgroup Error Message Index
1000 Couldn't make items shared.
1001 Shared categories with local fields are not allowed in this
version of Commence.
1002 You have marked the field <fieldname> as shared but the
category is not shared. No fields in a non-shared category may
be shared.
1003 This database cannot create remote databases because it
is not a client database.
1004 This stand-alone database cannot be used with SyncLink;
create a remote database in order to use SyncLink.
1010 The permissions you have been granted do not allow this
operation.
1011 The permissions you have been granted do not allow you to
add this shared <data or definition>.
1012 The permissions you have been granted do not allow you to
edit this shared <data or definition>.
1013 The permissions you have been granted do not allow you to
delete this shared <data or definition>.
1015 The permissions you have been granted do not allow you to
overwrite this shared <view name>.
1017 The Login ID field is required for a valid login.
1018 An error occurred accessing the Administration library.
1019 Login was not successful. Try again or select Cancel.
1020 The permissions you have been granted do not allow you to
access this database.
1021 The Admin directory could not be located or does not
contain the proper admin files.
1024 This version of Commence requires a different version of
the Administration library.
1025 An error occurred while using this database with the
Administration library.
1026 The server has failed to respond to the sync request; check
that the server is running.
1027 The database is not connected to the server and automatic
syncing will be disabled.
1028 This database is enrolled for a different user; select a
different data directory or enter a different login name.
1029 An error occurred while registering this client. Check the
Message Log for additional information.
1032 The Login ID was not found. It may have been deleted, or it
does not exist.
1033 The automatic login failed; please enter login name and
password.
1034 The Commence server license is not valid for the number of
users defined in ComAdmin. Please use the License utility to
update Commence with a valid license that authorizes <number>
users.
1042 Commence has detected an invalid filetype during syncing;
use Transfer Out and In to a new database to correct this
problem.
1050 A workgroup error has occurred. ADMINENG.DLL returned
error code <error code>.
1051 <Key> is not a valid authorization key. Enter the key exactly
as it appears on your instruction sheet. There should be no
spaces or punctuations.
1052 Template file for the client instruction sheet was not found
<template filename>. Instruction sheet cannot be generated.
1053 Server communication parameters not found. Please
configure the server using the Customize-Workgroup command.
1054 Commence cannot run while a copy of the Commence
Administration program is active. Shut down ComAdmin before
starting Commence.
1055 The workgroup admin files are currently locked either by
ComAdmin or another copy of Commence. Try again later.
1056 Could not find the database registration information from the
server. Verify that your communication parameters are entered
correctly.
If problems persist, contact your Commence administrator to:
1. 
verify that your instruction sheet is up-to-date, and,
2. 
arrange for the server to re-send the registration
information.
1057 The communication settings for this workgroup database
are missing or invalid and automatic syncing is disabled for this
session.
To re-start syncing:
1. 
Use the Customize-Workgroup command to enter the
correct communication parameters, or,
2. 
Connect to the network and re-start Commence.
1058 The communication settings for this database are missing or
invalid. Select the Configure button to change the settings.
1059 Shared LAN directory is unavailable and synchronization is
disabled.
Defined Terms Index
action
activate
active
active category
active view
active window
agent
agent tool bar
arrange
associated category
backup
base database
busy bar
calculation field
category
check box
check box field
clarify field
clipboard
color template
combo box
condition
connect
connected field
connection
connection control
connection definition
control menu box
data file field
database
database directory
database password
date field
day title
database
deactivate
definition
design
desktop
detail form
dialing device
dialog box
direct field
drop-down list box
edit box
e-mail address field
Excel cell field
export
field
field code
field value
field summary
filter
formatted template
global search
group box
group calendaring
hypertext transfer protocol
hypertext markup language
html
http
image
image field
import
inactive
item
item detail
lan
layout
legend
letter template
list box
mapping
multi-select list box
name field
number field
paper layout
password
prefix string
property
radio button
recurring item
related date
remote database
restore
ribbon
saved view
scroll bars
search text
selection field
sequence number field
snooze
static area
status bar
Sync Link
synchronize
telephone field
tab
text box
text field
text template
time field
title bar
toggle
tool bar
tool bar agent
transfer
transfer file
sync link group
trigger
uniform resource locator (url)
update file
url
url address field
view
view bar
view type
wildcard pattern
work area
Keyboard Commands and Mouse Shortcuts
You can use Commence with a keyboard only, or a mouse and
keyboard. A mouse is recommended because it makes working in
the Microsoft Windows environment easier.
 
The following topics explain the keyboard equivalents for those
activities in Commence that do not require a mouse.
 
the keys you use to select menu commands
keys you use to fill out a dialog box or detail form
keys you can use to select from and scroll through a multiple
selection list box
keys you use to arrange fields on a detail form
keys you use to navigate around a view (in particular, the
key equivalents for the calendar view control panel)
window control keys
 
Two activities, however, cannot be performed without the aid of a
mouse:
 
choosing a view icon from the view bar
choosing a command icon from the tool bar
 
We also list some mouse shortcuts that you can use in many
dialog boxes within Commence.
Valid Field Codes or Keywords
See Also
General Commence keywords
Keyword
Evaluates To
(-ProgramDir-)
The full path to COMMENCE.EXE, e.g.,
c:\program files\commence
(-ProgramExe-)
The full path and filename of the
COMMENCE.EXE, e.g., c:\program
files\commence\commence.exe
(-AppDataDir-)
The full path to the Application Data
Directory where user-created files and
interactive files are stored by default (e.g.
backups, exports, etc.) e.g., c:\program
data\commence\commence\7.5 or
c:\documents and settings\all
users\application
data\commence\commence\7.5
(-
DatabasePath-)
The full path of the currently active
database.
(-
DatabaseName-)
The Name of the currently active database.
(-Category-)
The name of the current category.
 
The following keywords are supported in Filters.
 
Keyword
Evaluates To
(-Me-)
The item name selected in Preferences -
Personal Info (found under the Customize
menu or Edit menu depending on your
version of Commence)
(-Date-)
The current date. In a date type field, this is
equivalent to Today. In any other field, it is
equivalent to today’s date in long format,.e.g.
January 01, 2010.
(-Time-)
The current time. In a time type field, this is
equivalent to Now. In any other field, it is
equivalent to the current time, e.g. 1:34PM.
(-StartDate-)
The start of the date range displayed in the
most recently active Calendar view. This is
used for View Linking and Multi-View filtering
(-EndDate-)
The end of the date range displayed in the
most recently active Calendar view. This is
used for View Linking and Multi-View
filtering. e.g., filter for all items in which the
Date field Is Between (-StartDate-) and (-
EndDate-)
(-
SelectedDate-)
The selected date of the most recently active
Calendar view. This is used for View Linking
and Multi-View filtering.
(-
SelectedItem-)
The highlighted item in the primary view.
This is used for View Linking and Multi-View
filtering.
(-
SelectedText-)
Search string for field(s) in the primary view.
This is used for Multi-View filtering.
 
 
In addition to the keywords listed above, agents also recognize
the following (in filters, or when assigning field values, or when
configuring DDE, etc.):
 
Keyword
Evaluates To
(-Clear-)
Will clear the current field
value. This is valid for all field
types, including Connections.
(-ClearAll-)
Will clear all connected
items, regardless of any filter.
(-ClearFiltered-)
Will only clear items that
match the applied filter.
(-TrigItemName-)
The Name of the Trigger
item.
(%Trig%%FieldName%)
The selected field value of
the Trigger item. Refers to a
direct field in the trigger
category.
(%Trig%%Connection
Name%%To Category
Name%%FieldName%)
The selected field value of
the Trigger item. Refers to an
indirect field in a connected
category.
(%Cond1%%FieldName%)
The selected field value of
the Condition 1 item. Refers
to a direct field in the
category specified in
Condition 1.
If there is more than one
condition item, will use the
first item.
(%Cond1%%Connection
Name%%To Category
Name%%FieldName%)
The selected field value of
the Condition 1 item.
If there is more than one
condition item, will use the
first item.
(%Cond2%%FieldName%)
The selected field value of
the Condition 2 item. Refers
to a direct field in the
category specified in
Condition 2.
If there is more than one
condition item, will use the
first item.
(%Cond2%%Connection
Name%%To Category
Name%%FieldName%)
The selected field value of
the Condition 2 item. Refers
to an indirect field in a
connected category.
If there is more than one
condition item, will use the
first item.
(%FieldName%)
The field value from the
selected trigger or condition.
 
(%Connection Name%%To
Category Name%%FieldName%)
The field value from the
selected trigger or condition.
Refers to an indirect field in a
connected category.
 
 
The following keywords are only valid for Incoming
Communication: Telephone Call agents and their actions: Note:
Not all values are valid in all phone systems.
 
Keyword
Evaluates To
(-
PhoneCallerName-)
Name of the caller.
(-PhoneCallerID-)
ID of the caller.
(-PhoneLine-)
The phone line.
 
The following keywords are only valid for Incoming
Communication: E-Mail agents and their actions:
 
Keyword
Evaluates To
(-EMailSenderName-)
The Name of the sender.
(-
EMailSenderAddress-)
The address of the sender.
(-EMailSubject-)
The subject of the message.
(-EMailMessage-)
The text of the message.
(-EMailStatus-)
The Read/Unread status of the
message.
(-EMailDate-)
The date the message was sent.
(-EMailTime-)
The time the message was sent.
 
 
 
Command Line Options
See Also
You can customize your Commence shortcut by
adding the following options to the end of the Target,
e.g., "c:\program files (x86)\commence\commence
rm workgroup\commence.exe" /PROMPT /TRACE.
Tips - To get started, right click on your Commence
shortcut and choose Properties. Click in the Target
box and use the END key on your keyboard to go to
the end of this line. Start typing your command line
options after the quote marks. You can add more than
one command line option; just put a space between
each one.
 
/QUIET
If you need to open more than one Commence database at the
same time, use this option to suppress the warning message that
there is another copy of Commence running. Commence will
quietly go ahead and start another instance.
 
/DATABASE=database name
Will start Commence and open the named database. Do not use
quote marks around the database name. Also note the forward
slash character is not supported in database names.
 
/DATABASE=database path
Will start Commence and open the database located in the
named directory.
 
/PROMPT
Will present a list of installed databases so you can select one to
open.
 
/NOVIEWS
Will not open any views when starting Commence. Note the View
bar icons will also be hidden temporarily. Switching to a different
desktop once in Commence will restore all views and view icons.
 
/NOAGENTS
Will prevent agent processing from occurring while Commence is
running. This is useful if you think you have an agent that is
causing problems with your database.
 
/NOTAPI
Will prevent Commence from loading and using TAPI. If
used,Commence will not be able to auto-
dial.
 
/TRACE
Will place additional information into the active.log file. The use of
this option may be requested by Commence Technical Support to
assist in troubleshooting.
 
/REINDEX
Will create new indices for all items when starting Commence.
Depending on the size of the database and the number of items,
this may take a while. If so, the PC should not be rebooted and
you should wait until the reindexing has completed.
 
Database Capacities
The following lists the maximum allowed of the listed item.
 
All of the following are per database
Categories 800
Connections 1000
Views 2000
Color Codes 1000
Import/Export templates 600
Agents 1000
Letter Templates 600
Desktops 100
Tool Bar Pick agents 100
 
 
The following are per Desktop
View Bar views 50
View Bar Icon labels 50 characters
Views menu views 40
Menu Pick agents 16
Open views 20
 
 
All of the following are per category
Items 500,000
Detail Forms 50
Fields (includes Name field and connections) 250
 
 
Other:
Selections in a combo box 4000
Databases 1000
Tabs per detail form 25
Data Manipulation Functions
See Also
 
Commence supports functions that permit data manipulation.
These functions can be used for numeric calculations and
date/time manipulations. These functions can be used in
calculation fields and in agents. The following table lists the
available data manipulation functions (also knows as @
functions).
 
Function Returns value:
@ABS(x) absolute value of x
@INT(x) integer value of x (truncates the decimal places)
@AVG(x,y, . . . ,z) average of values
@MAX(x,y, . . .,z) maximum of the values
@MIN(x,y, . . .,z) minimum of the values
@DATE(date) numeric value of date. Date can be any date or
natural language date such as Today.
@DAY(date) day component of the date (1 . . . 31)
@MONTH(date) month component of the date(1 . . . 12)
@YEAR(date) year component of the date(1600 . . . 2999)
@DOW(date) day of the week for the date (0=Sunday,
1=Monday, etc.)
@QTR(date) quarter of the year in which the date falls (1 . . . 4)
@TIME(time) numeric value of time. Time can be any date or
natural language time such as "Now"
@HOUR(time) hour component of the time (0 . . . 24)
@MINUTE(time) minute component of the time (0 . . . 59)
@AGE(date) age in years. The age calculation is based on
today's date. If the date is in the future,
@AGE returns 0.
@POW(x,y) xy (x raised to the y-th power).
@FV(Payment,Rate,Term) future value of an ordinary annuity of
equal Payments, earning a fixed interest
Rate per term, compounded over several
Terms. It is assumed that the first Payment is
at the end of the first period. The formula
used is:
Payment ((1 + Rate)Term - 1)
Rate
@PV(Payment,Rate,Term) present value of an ordinary annuity
of equal Payments, earning a fixed interest
Rate per term, over several Terms. It is
assumed that the first Payment is at the end
of the first term. The formula used is:
Payment (1 - (1 + Rate)Term)
Rate
@PMT(Principal,Rate,Term) the periodic payment for a Principal
based upon a fixed interest Rate per
compounding period over a given Term. The
formula used is:
(Present Value)(Rate)
(1 - (1 + Rate)Term)
@RATE(FutureValue,PresentValue,Term)
the fixed interest rate per compounding period needed for
PresentValue to grow to FutureValue over
Term. The formula used is:
(FutureValue/PresentValue)1/Term - 1
@TERM(Payment,Rate,FutureValue)
the number of compounding periods necessary for a series of
equal Payments, earning a fixed interest
Rate, to grow to FutureValue.
@LN(x) the natural logarithm of x.
@LOG(x) the base 10 logarithm of x.
@ROUND(x, y) Rounds a number to a specified number of
digits.
 
 
In the above list, x, y, and z must be valid numeric arguments,
and date and time must be valid date and time strings, such as
"January 1," "Today," "Now," and "Noon." The values for
Payment, Principle, PresentValue, FutureValue are all number or
currency values. Rate is a percentage, without the %, i.e. 9.00
for 9.00%. The value for term is a number value, for example, 12
for 12 months or 1 for 1 year. If you use these functions with
mismatched arguments, for example @DAY([Start Time]), the
results will be unpredictable.
 
It is suggested that arguments be enclosed in double quotation
marks ( " " ) since the field substitution may introduce commas or
quotation marks which will alter the result of the function. For
example, if using the function @MAX([Number], 500) and
Number is "1,200", the result would be "500" since Commence
would interpret it as @MAX(1,200,500), which is three numbers.
If the function is changed to be @MAX("[Number]",500), the
correct result "1,200" would be returned.
 
Note: When defining an Add Item or Edit Item agent action,
Commence will automatically add the double quote delimiters.
Book View Type
See Also
The book view type displays items in a window that looks like an
address book. Any category can be displayed in a view using the
book view type.
 
An example is the Address Book view included with Commence; it
is a book view of the Person/Company category.
 
Items are arranged alphabetically in the book. Each page in the
book displays a letter of the alphabet at the top of the page; items
appearing on the page have an item name field that begins with
that letter of the alphabet. Items beginning with numbers or
special characters (including a tab or space) appear under the #
character.
 
The book view provides the following controls:
ALPHABETIC TABS
To see items in the view whose item name fields begin with a
particular letter, use your mouse to select the appropriate tab on
the left or right side of the book. You can also type the letter on
your keyboard to go to the first page of items that begin with the
letter typed. A grayed tab indicates that there are no items in the
view beginning with that letter.
FOLDED PAGE CORNERS
Select a folded corner at the top of the page with your mouse (or
use the left and right arrow keys on your keyboard) to move
through the book one page at a time. Use the up arrow key on
your keyboard to move to the first preceding page that contains
an item. Use the down arrow key to move to the first following
page that contains an item.
 
To display the item detail of an item in a book view, double-click
the mouse on the item or highlight the item and press the ENTER
key.
Calendar View Type
The calendar view type is used to display items that occur on a
particular date and have a time interval on that date. A category
must have at least one time field and one date field to be
displayed by a view using the calendar view type.
 
You can display the item detail of any item displayed by a
calendar view in Day display mode (see below) by selecting the
item name of the item you want to see. From the other display
modes (Two Days Week, Two Weeks, Month, Six Weeks and
Year) you can double-click on a date to display the Calendar
Items dialog and then select any item to display its item detail.
 
The topics listed below explain the various parts and display
modes of the calendar view. Select a topic or use the Browse >>
button to display each topic in order.
 
Active Date
Display Modes
Calendar Tool Bar
Gantt Chart View Type
See Also
A Gantt chart view provides a way to graphically display the
durations of items (such as tasks) that may span more than one
day. A category must have at least one date field in order to be
used in a Gantt chart view.
 
The Project category included with Commence is an example of a
category that has start date and end date fields and is used in a
Gantt chart view. This is displayed in the Project Manager view.
 
The Gantt chart view type displays item names on the left side of
the view window, while the right side of the window displays color
coded triangles and horizontal bars to represent the duration of
each item according to the time scale displayed at the top.
 
The time scale for a Gantt chart view can be changed using the
Customize-Design View command and selecting the Display tab.
 
Horizontal bars represent the duration of an item with different
start and end dates; triangles are used for items whose start and
end dates are the same date (one-day duration items).
 
A legend that explains the color coding scheme can be displayed
by selecting the Customize-Design View command and
selecting the Display tab. You can change the color coding
scheme used by a calendar view by selecting a color coding
template with the Customize-Design View command and
selecting the Colors tab. You can create new color coding
templates using the Customize-Database command and selecting
the Color Code tab.
 
Display the item detail of an item in a Gantt chart view by double-
clicking the mouse on the item name or its associated duration.
Grid View Type
See Also
A grid view is a type of view that displays data in a row/column
format. A grid can be used in two modes: read-only and update
mode. When used in read-only mode grid views are similar to
reports in many ways. Data can be viewed and printed; items
can be rearranged and queried through sorting and filtering;
letters can be created, and agents can be fired.
 
Special field handles are provided for some field types to
perform functions unique to that field. These functions work in
both update mode and read-only mode. Supported functions
include: -- sending an email from an E-Mail Address field
-- opening a Web page from an Internet Address (URL) field
-- auto-dialing a phone number from a Telephone field
-- launching the associated application from a Data File field
 
Grid Toolbar
The toolbar located at the top of the grid view is similar to that
on a detail form. The Switch Modes button on this toolbar
allows you to toggle between read-only and update mode. In
update mode, the data in each row or column can be updated
directly in the grid without opening a detail form.
 
Most of the buttons found on the Grid Toolbar are only used in
update mode. All other buttons are inactive in update mode.
 
Button
Purpose
image/saveplus_shg.
gif
SAVE AND ADD ANOTHER: Press
this button to save pending changes
to the active item and add new row
 
 
image/savechk_shg.gi
f
SAVE: Press this button to save
pending changes to the active item.
Moving the cursor to a different
item/row also saves all field edits for
the previous item.
 
 
image/cancel_shg.gif
CANCEL: Press this button to undo
changes; revert active item to last
saved state.
 
 
image/delrow_shg.gif
DELETE ITEM (Read-only mode):
Press this button to delete the
selected item/row.
 
 
image/share_shg.gif
SHARE ITEM: This button is only
active for shared categories. Press
this button to share the selected item
with other clients in the workgroup.
Once shared, an item cannot be
made local and the button will
become inactive.
 
 
image/refresh_shg.gif
REFRESH: Press this button to
refresh the active view. Toggling
from update mode to read-only also
refreshes the view automatically
 
 
image/readupd_shg.gi
f
SWITCH MODES: Press this button
to toggle between read-only and
update mode.
 
 
image/updatepd_shg.
gif
PENDING REFRESH ALERT
(Update mode): This indicator
reflects whether there are pending
database changes that need to be
integrated with the grid view.
 
 
Adding and Editing Items
Using a grid view in update mode is equivalent to opening a
detail form. Changes can be made to most fields by simply
typing directly into the cell. When working with connections or
fields with unique properties, special field handles are provided
to give you the same flexibility in modifying the field as in Detail
Forms.
 
As records are changed in the database (due to agents, import,
workgroup, etc.) the grid view holds these changes in the
background allowing you to finish your record updates. The
Pending Refresh Alert indicator reflects whether there are
pending database changes that need to be integrated with the
grid view. Pressing the REFRESH button will make the view
include these changes, and will turn off the indicator. Exiting
UPDATE mode will also make the grid view include these
changes, and will turn off the indicator. When active it indicates
that an update has been received or that a change has been
made to the view requiring a refresh.
 
The grid view layout cannot be modified while in update mode.
As with detail forms the Design View, Sort View, and Filter
View commands on the Customize menu are inactive in this
mode. The same buttons on the Toolbar are also disabled for a
grid view in update mode. Synchronization can occur in the
background but does not update the view immediately. This
prevents unsaved items from being lost in the process. View
refreshes are also suspended. Press the REFRESH button on
the grid toolbar to apply and pending view updates to the active
grid view.
 
Read-Only Mode
Using a grid view in read-only mode is very similar to using a
report view. Prefix Matching is supported for quickly locating an
item by name. The following keyboard shortcuts can also be
used to expedite navigating through large views:
 
Page Up/Down: Set the active row one page above or
below the selected row.
Tab/ Enter: Set the active column to the next field.
Shift+Tab: Set the active column to the previous field.
Arrow Keys: Move the cursor one field in the direction of
the arrow.
 
 
Special Considerations
Grid views share many of the same features as report views
and detail forms with a few exceptions. The following features
are not supported in a grid view:
 
Visual Basic Scripting: A script defined on a detail form has
no effect on items in a grid view, even in update
mode. Any item modifications that affect or are
affected by script processing should be
performed in a detail form. A detail from can be
launched for any item in a grid view by double-
clicking on the header for the row, or by
selecting the Edit -> Edit Item command.
 
Other preferences: The “Treat Enter like Tab key” preference
for detail forms does not apply to grid views,
even in update mode. Much like a spreadsheet,
the “Enter” key is used to tab from one column
to the next in a row. This functionality
supercedes any other common uses of the
Enter key, such as opening a detail form, saving
item changes, or inserting a carriage return into
a large text field.
 
Keyboard hotkeys: Most keyboard hotkeys and shortcuts will
perform different functions or may be
suppressed when a grid view is active so that
grid view functions can take precedence.
Minimizing or closing the grid view restores
normal keyboard operation.
Document View Type
 
The Document view provides a way to integrate Internet and
Intranet based applications and pages directly on your
Commence desktop. It creates a seamless link between your
local data and applications and remote applications and
content.
 
The Document view incorporates the Microsoft Internet Explorer
browser, including all of the extensibility, scripting, and
programming support offered on the web, including but not
limited to HTML, DHTML, VBScript, Javascript, Java objects,
and ActiveX controls. This allows you to display HTML content
directly from the Commence database or from a remote URL.
Multi-View Type
See Also
A Multi-View is a set of related views displayed in one window
frame. The window is split into two panes, either horizontally or
vertically. The top or left pane is the primary window and
displays one view. The primary view can be opened as a detail
form or as any of the standard view types: Book, Calendar,
Gantt, Report, and Grid. The various methods of navigation for
these view types is unchanged in a multi-view. For example,
you can click on the alphabetic tabs in a Book view or use
prefix matching to locate a particular item.
 
The secondary pane is located either below or to the right of the
primary pane. One or more views can be saved in the
secondary window, but only one secondary view is displayed at
a time. Each view is opened by clicking on the View Tab for that
view.
 
View Tabs
The secondary pane in a multi-view window has a set of VCR-
style buttons next to the view tabs. These buttons are used
when there are too many secondary views defined to fit all the
view tabs on the visible portion of the screen. The first button
makes the first view tab visible, the last button makes the last
view tab visible, and the middle buttons allow you to scroll right
or left one tab at a time. Once you have located the view you
wish to open, click on that view tab. Note that the active view is
not changed until after you click on the view tab to open a
different secondary view.
 
Using a detail form in the primary pane
When a detail form is saved as the primary window in a multi-
view, only one item at a time will be displayed. The Next and
Back buttons on the detail form toolbar can be used to navigate
to other items in the view. Closing and reopening a multi-view
resets the display to the first item in the view.
 
Splitter Bar
A splitter bar separates the primary window from the secondary
window in a multi-view. By default the primary window is sized
to fit 45% of the window. You can adjust the proportions any
time after the multi-view has been created by simply dragging
the splitter bar on screen.
Report View Type
See Also
The report view type displays each item in a view in a horizontal
row or vertical column format. Any category can be displayed in a
view using the report view type.
 
The Person/Company, Support Call, and Opportunity categories
are examples of categories with views using the report view type.
 
Items are displayed in a horizontal or vertical format, with one
field per column. If a connection definition included in the report
contains more values than can fit in a column or row, (multiple)
appears as the last value for the field, indicating that there are
more values in the connection definition. Edit the Field Options
for the field using the Customize-Design View command and
selecting the Field tab increase the size of the connection
definition's display area and display more of the values in the
report.
 
To see the item detail of an item in a report, double-click the
mouse on the item or highlight the item and press the ENTER
key.
 
If field labels are displayed, the primary and secondary sort fields
are indicated by a solid underline and dotted underline,
respectively. You can change the either sort key by pointing at a
field label with the mouse and pressing the left (for the primary
sort key) or right (for the secondary sort key) mouse buttons. Use
the Customize-Sort View command to change any of the four
allowed sort fields.
 
Report views also allow you to show different groups and sub-
totals based upon the fields used for the sort order. See
Customize-Sort View for more information on Report View Groups
and Sub-Totals.
 
Report views provide a great deal of flexibility in the way your
data is displayed, though they don't have controls like the other
view types. To change the way a report displays your data, you
use the Customize-Design View command or the
image/design_shg.gif
icon on the tool bar.
Report Viewer View Type
The Report Viewer displays data from your Commence database
in read-only mode. Data can be viewed, printed, and exported to
various file formats. Once the report has been generated,
changes can be made only by redesigning the report. Features
that require you to select an item in the view (such as sending
letters, using drag and drop, or agents) are unavailable in the
report viewer.
 
Toolbar
The toolbar located at the top of the report viewer window
contains commands for:
Exporting the report to other file formats
Refreshing the report with the latest database information
Changing the Zoom level of the view
Navigating between pages of the report
 
Creating a new Report Viewer
To create a formatted report using the report viewer:
1. Select Views -> Open/Manage Views from the menu. Click
Create New. The New View dialog box will appear.
2. In the View As radio group, choose “Report Viewer”.
3. From the category list box, highlight the category that
contains the data for the new view. Click View to open the
new report.
4. A New View will be opened.
5. Select Customize -> Design View to begin formatting the
report.
 
Fields: This tab lets you select which fields will be
displayed in the report viewer
Filter/Sort: This tab lets you set filters and sorts for
the report viewer
Design: This tab takes you to the Commence
Report Designer so you can design your report
layout and configure other report attributes
 
6. On the Design tab, click Launch Designer. You will be
prompted to save the new report viewer.
7. Enter a View Name and click Save.
Note: The report viewer may be saved to the View Bar or
Views Menu along with your other Commence views.
8. After saving the report viewer, the Commence Report
Designer will launch. For more information, see the
“Commence Report Designer” in the User's Guide.
 
Report Designer
The Commence Report Designer is used to customize the report
layout for the Report Viewer.
1. The report viewer window should be the active window.
2. After selecting Customize -> Design View, click the Design
tab.
3. Click the Launch Designer... button to open the Report
Designer window.
4. The fields you selected in the report viewer will be listed in
the Fields toolbox.
Note: Each field in this list has been bound to a text box,
also known as a control, within the Report Designer. As you
customize the properties for each field, you are actually
setting the properties for the control that the field has been
bound to.
5. Use drag and drop to move each field into the report layout.
Fields can be positioned anywhere in the Header, Body, or
Footer of the report. When you drop the field into the report,
it will be displayed as a box and the field label will be
changed to ’txtFieldname’ or ’Field1’ indicating that this field
is now a text or field control.
Tip To add multiple copies of the same field to the report,
you can hold the CTRL key on your keyboard while dragging
and dropping the field from the Fields toolbox to the report.
6. Each field can be resized to accomodate the amount of data
expected for each field. To resize a field, click on the edge of
the control for that field until handles appear on each side. A
handle can be dragged in two directions to increase or
decrease the field width and height as needed.
7. Additional controls, such as labels, lines and images can be
added to the report.
8. As you design the report, you may click Preview at the top of
the Commence Report Designer window to see what the
report looks like at each stage in the design process.
9. Each field you add to the report has properties that can be
set, such as font and color. In the Property Toolbox, select
the field you want to customize from the drop-down list. Or
click directly on the field in the report to access the
properties for that field.
10. You can add page numbering to your report using the field's
PageCount summary type. Page numbers are created using
a running summary field.
11. When you are finished designing the report, click on Save to
Commence to save the report viewer layout.
12. Select File -> Exit to close the Commence Report Designer.
 
More Information
See the Commence User's Guide for more details about
using the Report Viewer commands
creating and designing a Report Viewer view type
View Menu Commands
Use commands on the Views menu to:
 
Open/Manage Views Open a saved view.
Save View Save a new view; save changes to a saved view.
Save View As Save a changed view under another name. (i.e.
copy a view)
Save View As HTML Save a report or calendar view as an HTML
file.
View As Click any view type in this group to copy a view to a new
view type.
Cascade Layer all open windows so that title bar of each is
visible.
 
Resize All Resize all open views to fit on the active desktop while
maintaining the relative porportions and
positions of individual views.
 
Tile Horizontally Size and re-display all open windows horizontally
so that no windows overlap.
 
Tile Vertically Size and re-display all open windows vertically so
that no windows overlap.
 
Close All Close all open windows (including any hidden behind
other windows).
 
Switch Windows 1, 2, 3... A numbered list of open views appears
at the bottom of this menu. The active view
has a check mark next to its name in the list.
Selecting a view from the list makes the
chosen view the active view.
More Windows... Activate an open view not appearing on the
Window menu.
 
Customize Menu Commands
Use the commands on the Customize menu to:
Design View Change the display, fields, colors, or fonts for the
active view.
Filter View Add or edit a filter that selects particular items from the
active category for display by the active view. Also
lets you remove the filter from the view so that it
displays all the items in the category.
Sort View Alter the order in which items are sorted for display by
the active view. This command is available only if the
active view is a Gantt chart or report.
Link Views Setup a dynamic view link between two open views,
enabling you to display a filtered set of items in one
view related to the highlighted item in the other view.
With Calendar views, you can display the items in
another view for the selected date or for the date
range displayed on the Calendar.
Desktops Add, edit, or delete desktops; open existing desktops;
show/hide all desktop tabs.
Database Add, edit, or delete categories, connections, agents,
color code templates, import/export templates, letter
templates, and detail forms.
 
Summary Tables
The following tables summarize Commence's triggers, conditions,
and actions for agents. The table indicates which triggers
generate trigger data, which conditions generate condition data,
and which actions either require or can optionally use this data.
 
These tables are best viewed in a maximized help window (press
ALT+SPACEBAR and select Maximize).
 
Triggers
Type Name Trigger Data Fires...
Timer Timer No at predetermined times Commence Event No
when Commence starts or closes
Manual Tool Bar Pick Optional when a tool bar button is pressed
Menu Pick Optional when an agent name is selected from Tools
menu Keyboard Hotkey Optional when a keyboard combination is
pressed Data Item Item Alarm Yes before a data item becomes
current Save Item Yes when a data item is edited and/or saved
External Receive DDE No on incoming DDE message Incoming
Communication No when a telephone call or E-Mail message is
received
Conditions
Type Name Condition Data Evaluates True...
Data Field Summary Yes if a field summary matches criteria Item
Count Yes if item count matches criteria
Time Time Interval No for specified time interval
Actions
Type Name Uses Data Description
Alerts Icon Modification No Changes the appearance of an icon
on the icon bar Message Box Optional Displays a message box
and can also do sub-actions Status Bar Message Optional
Displays a message on the status bar Play Multimedia Optional
Plays a Windows multimedia file
Data Add Item Optional Adds a new item and optionally displays it
Modification/ Edit Item Required Edits an existing item and
optionally displays it Display Delete Item Required Deletes an
existing item
New View Optional Displays a new view
Open View No Displays an existing view
Commence Print Letter Required Generates a letter using a
template Commands Print Items Optional Prints a view or item
Import Required Import data from an external DOS file
Export Required Export data to an external DOS file
Sync Link Out Required Create an update file for synchronizing
databases Sync Link In Required Read an update file to
synchronize the database Backup Required Compress the
database into an external DOS file Outlook Sync Required
Exchanges data with Microsoft Outlook Use Telephone Optional
Will answer a telephone call, dial the phone, or hang up Set
Agent Status No Makes another agent active or inactive Manage
Desktop No Cascades, tiles, or closes all views. Can open a
desktop External Application Launch Optional Launches another
application with command line data Commands Send DDE
Optional Sends a DDE message
Create E-Mail Optional Creates and sends an electronic mail
message Process E-Mail Optional Deletes or moves E-Mail to a
folder
Customize-Database-Agent
See Also
One of the most powerful features of Commence is its agent
facility. Agents let you instruct Commence to automatically
perform tasks for you.
 
This command displays the Agent tab.
 
From this tab, you choose the trigger, up to two optional
conditions, and up to four actions for a new agent. You can also
edit and delete existing agents.
Natural Language Dates
See Also
You can specify dates in a date type field using plain English
words. This is a convenient alternative to specifying exact dates,
as it allows you to enter commonly used phrases, like "a week
from today", "two months ago", and "a week from next Sunday".
The sections below list the valid formats by keyword.
When you enter a date in one of these formats, Commence
figures out the exact date for you. For example, if today's date is
1/3/94, and you enter "one week from today" in a date field,
Commence inserts "1/10/94" into the date field for you when you
switch to another field or save the item.
Always check Commence's interpretation of any natural language
dates you use before you save the item. Do this by moving the
cursor to another field after you type in the natural language date.
If the format you used is valid, the natural language will change to
a real date.
Commence will, given a vague phrase, make a best guess as to
your meaning. That is, a phrase like "a day after next week"
would evaluate the same as "a week from today"; "next january"
would evaluate to January 1st of the following year. Remember
that the phrases you use should indicate an exact date.
Some phrases, like "january after next week", are too ambiguous
and will generate an invalid date error if you try to save the item
with such a date.
Capitalizations, punctuation, and the words "a", "the", and "day"
(as in "22nd day of august") are optional in natural language
dates, but are allowed. For example, "The twenty-second Day of
August, 1998" could be entered as "twenty-second of august
1998" with the same result.
Note: Another method of entering dates is to double-click on any
date field in an item detail or dialog box. This displays the Select
Date dialog box where you can display monthly calendars to
select a date and then select the OK button to return to the
previous window.
Day Names
You can specify any of the following day names in a date field:
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,
Sunday
Mon, Tues, Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat, Sun
Day names specified by themselves in a date field return either
the current day or the next day with the name specified. That is, if
today is Monday and you type "Monday" in a date field,
Commence assumes you mean today; if you type "Tuesday",
Commence assumes you mean tomorrow, etc.
 
The date returned by a day name used in conjunction with other
date formats depends on the format used. In other formats, a day
can be preceded by an ordinal, as in First Tuesday, Second
Thursday, etc.
Special Days
Commence recognizes the following special days and substitutes
the indicated date: Lincoln's Birthday February 12
Veterans Day November 11
Veterans' Day
Columbus Day October 12
Month Names
You can specify any of the following month names in a date field:
January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August,
September, October, November, December
Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov, Dec
Month names specified by themselves in a date field return the
first day of the named month in the current year. That is, if this
month is April and you type "April" in a date field, Commence
assumes you mean April 1st of the current year; if you type
"March", Commence assumes you mean March 1st of the current
year, etc.
Day Aliases
The following day aliases:
Yesterday, Yest, Today, Tomorrow, Tom
return the date of the indicated day when specified alone in a
date field. The date returned by a day alias used in conjunction
with other date formats depends on the format used.
Month Ordinal
Days of the month can be specified in any of the following
formats:
June First, June Second, June Third, June Fourth,
June Twenty-Second, etc.
June 1st, June 2nd, June 3rd, June 4th, June 22nd, etc.
1st of June, 2nd of June, 3rd of June, 4th of June,
22nd of June, etc.
First of June, Second of June, Twenty-third of June, etc.
June 1, June 2, June 3, June 4, June 22, etc.
1 June, 2 June, 3 June, 4 June, 22 June, etc.
The current year is assumed unless you add a year at the end
(e.g., June 2, 1995).
Last/This/Next
You can use the words Last, This, or Next in the following ways
to specify a date: Last/This/Next <DayName/MonthName>
Last/This/Next week/month/quarter/year (date returned is the
first day in the appropriate week, month, quarter, or year) <any of
above formats> of Last/This/Next week/month/quarter/year
Last in this format means "previous" and not "final"; i.e., "the last
day of 1989" is an invalid date format.
 
Some examples:
Next Monday
Last week
Third Tuesday of next quarter
Quarter
Specify the first day of a quarter of the year using the following
formats:
1q, 2q, 3q, 4q
1st quarter, 2nd quarter, etc.
First quarter, Second quarter, etc.
The current year is assumed unless you add a year at the end
(e.g., 1q 1995).
End of Period
You can specify the last day of the following formats using the
form:
The end of <MonthName>/<Last/This/Next>/<Quarter> You can
add a year at the end of the above format (e.g., "end of first
quarter, 1989"), except when using <Last/This/Next> (e.g., "the
end of last quarter, 1998" is not valid). You can also use a year by
itself (e.g., "end of 1999").
Beginning/End
You can use the words beginning and end to indicate the end of
a period: The beginning/end of the week/month/quarter/year
The beginning/end of <Last/This/Next>
week/month/quarter/year
month and year can also be literal months (i.e., June, July, etc.)
in the first format.
Before/After
You can use the words before or after in the following ways to
specify a date: A day before/after <any of the above formats> A
week/month/quarter/year before/after
<DayAlias>/<MonthOrdinal>/<Last/This/Next> Complex
Formats
The following complex formats are also allowed. The <format>
string refers to any of the above formats, though some specific
forms may not be allowed if they do not specify an exact date.
 
When using complex formats, be sure to check the interpreted
value of the date field before selecting Save on an item detail; do
this by moving the cursor to another field after you type in the
natural language date. If the format you used is valid, the natural
language will change to a real date.
 
The formats below cannot be combined with one another to
construct even more complex formats.
 
The subsections below present examples of complex format
usage. The lists are not exhaustive since the possible
combinations of formats are almost limitless.
The <Ordinal> Day/Month/Week/Quarter Of/In The
Week/Month/Quarter/Year
Second month of 1993
Third day of next week
Second week in June
Fourth quarter of 1998
<format> before <format>
First thursday before may first
The friday before the beginning of next month
One month before Lincoln's Birthday, 1998
<format> after <format>
Next thursday after 1/5/99
The second friday after the beginning of next quarter
<format> from <format>
Two weeks from today
One month from yesterday
Three weeks from the beginning of next quarter
<number of> days/weeks/months/quarters/years ago
Two weeks ago
A month ago
A year ago
Natural Language Times
See Also
You can specify times in a time type field using numbers (e.g.,
9:00 am, 9 am, 9) and also using plain English words. Using
words is a convenient alternative to specifying exact times, as it
allows you to enter commonly used phrases, like "now" and
"noon". Time type fields accept a limited set of keywords in place
of exact times. The valid keywords and their translations are
listed below.
begin
start
The system clock time at the time the item detail was opened
using the Edit-Add Item command. These are typically used as
start times in log items to record the beginning of a logged event
(such as a phone call).
end
stop
The system clock time at the time the item detail (opened using
the Edit-Add Item command) was closed and saved. These are
typically used as end times in log items to record the end of a
logged event (such as a phone call).
now
The current time.
noon
12PM or 1200 hours (midday).
midnight
mid-night
midnite
12AM or 2400 hours.
 
Short Time Formats
Time fields allow you to be flexible when entering times. A space
can be used as the hour/minute separator and you can use A and
P to substitute for AM and PM
 
The following are some examples of how the short time format
works:
Time value entered: Evaluates to:
1 1:00
123 1:23
1234 12:34
1p 1:00 PM
1 23p 1:23 PM
 
Simple Calculations with Time Fields
Time fields allow simple operations using + and - to add or
subtract some number of minutes.
 
The following are some examples of how the simple calculations
work with time fields:
Time value entered: Evaluates to:
10 PM + 5 10:05 PM
10 AM - 5 9:55 AM
Midnight + 60 1:00 AM
Midnight + 720 12:00 PM
Start + 10 System time (when item was added) + 10 minutes
Open/Manage Database Dialog Box From here you
can:
Open a different database
Add a new database
Edit the Name of an exiting database
Delete a database
Backup a database
Restore a backup of a Commence database.
 
This dialog box displays the names of all the Commence
databases in the Commence Databases list box. The name of
the open, or active, database has the word (active) to its right in
the list box.
 
Up to 1000 Commence databases can appear in the Commence
Databases list box. Views, categories, agents, preferences, etc.
defined in a particular database are accessible only when that
database is open. Only one database can be open at a time.
Detail Form Design Dialog Box
You can customize the detail form by:
 
Changing attributes for the entire form using the Properties
window.
Customizing individual field attributes by highlighting one or
more fields and selecting Properties from the right click
menu.
Customizing the arrangement of the fields on the screen.
See Designing Detail Forms for how to arrange detail form
fields.
Keyboard users can change the automatic field Tabbing
Order which is based on the arrangement of the fields on the
screen. Setting the tab order ignores how the fields are
arranged and follows the order you specify.
Customize the tab pages of a form by adding, editing, and
deleting tabs. See Working with Detail Form Tabs for more
information.
 
 
 
SAVE
Choose the File-Save command. If you make any changes to
the form or field attributes, this button changes to a Save
Arrangement button; select it when you are done editing the
form to save your changes.
 
EXIT
Choose the File-Exit command if you have made no changes or
if you want to leave the form as it is and discard your changes.
This will cancel any unsaved changes you have made.
Designing Detail Forms
See Also
Use the lower part of the Design Detail Form dialog box to tune
the arrangement of your fields so they don't overlap and are in an
order you like .
 
To drag a field to a new position with a mouse, simply left click on
it and, holding the left mouse button down, drag it to the location
you want, and release the left mouse button. To drag a field to a
new position using the keyboard, TAB to the field and select
SPACE BAR to "grab" the field. Use the ARROW KEYS to move
the field a small amount or use CTRL+ARROW KEYS to move
the field by larger increments. When you have the field in the
position you want, select SPACE BAR to release the field.
 
If you try to drag the field past the edge of the window, the screen
will automatically scroll.
 
When you select a field, lightly colored "cross-hairs" will appear to
help orient you in aligning the field with adjacent fields.
Commence automatically determines the tab order for the fields
based on the postion of each field on the detail form. The tab
order starts with the field in the upper left corner, then tabs to the
next field(s) in that row (if any), then tabs to the next row.
Commence’s automatic tab order assumes the tops of the boxes
are lined up for each row of fields on the form. You can also set
your own Tab Order if you prefer.
 
For example, the Field Start options for a text field gives you a
vertical cross-hair at the start of a text entry box, while the Label
Start option gives you a vertical cross-hair at the beginning of the
first letter of the field label. If you want to align by the end of the
text entry box, use the Field End alignment option.
New View Dialog Box
The New View dialog box is displayed by the View-Open/Manage
Views command and clicking on the Create New button. Use it to
create a view. After filling out this dialog box and selecting the
View button, the new view is displayed and becomes the active
view.
 
The elements of this dialog box are:
CATEGORY
From the category list box, highlight the category that you want to
use to create a view.
Shortcut: You can open a new view by first choosing appropriate
radio buttons in the View As and/or Report Style radio groups
and then double-clicking the mouse over the name of the
category you want.
VIEW AS
In the View As radio group, choose the view type that you want to
use to create a view. Choose one of the alternatives by clicking
the mouse on the radio button next to the view type you want.
 
See View Types for a review of the view types. See Choosing a
View Type for how to pick an appropriate view type for a category.
REPORT STYLE
For report views, choose All Fields in the Report Style radio
group to include all fields in the report; select Name Only for a
report that includes the name field alone.
 
Once you create the view, you can use the Customize-Design
View command and select the Fields tab to change the fields
included in the report.
VIEW
Once you have selected all the options you want from the New
View dialog box, select the View button.
 
If you have selected a Multi-View, you will be presented with the
Multi-View Properties wizard which allows you to set the various
properties.
 
If you have selected a Document view, you will be presented with
the Document View Options which allows you to specify the
Document URL.
 
All views require a view design. Commence will attempt to pick
appropriate defaults for the view layout when you select View.
This process may fail if you do not have appropriate fields for a
calendar or Gantt chart view (default values can always be
chosen for book, grid and report views).
 
A calendar one time field and one date field (the due date field;
i.e., the date the item takes place). A Gantt chart view requires
two date fields (one for start date and one for end date of each
item). If appropriate time and/or date fields do not exist in the
selected category, Commence informs you of this fact, and the
view is not displayed.
 
You can change any view's layout using the Customize-Design
View command and selecting the Fields tab. You may want to do
this after you create the new view if multiple time and or date
fields exist in the category and you want to ensure that
Commence picked appropriate view layout fields.
 
 
 
 
 
To see a field that isn't shown in the active report/grid
view:
 
1. 
With the view open and active, select Customize-
Design View and select the Fields tab.
2. 
On the left side of the Fields dialog box are the
fields in the view. On the right side are the fields not
in the view. Highlight the field on the right that you
wish to see in the report.
3. 
To put the field at the end of the report, select the
Append Field button. The field will be placed at the
end of the view.
4. 
To place the field somewhere in the middle of the
view, in the Fields In Report list box, highlight the
field you want the new field to be above and then
select the Insert button. The field will be moved
above the highlighted field.
5. 
To add a combined field (multiple fields on one line)
to a view, highlight the first field you want to include
in the combined field and select the Combine
Fields button.
6. 
Select OK.
7. 
The view will now show the field in the report.
Note: This change is just temporary.
If you close the view without saving it, the change will be
lost. To make the changes permanent, save the view with
View-Save View or select Yes when Commence asks to
save changes to the view.
 
 
 
 
To see a field that isn't shown in the active book view:
1. With the book view open and active, select Customize-
Design View and select the Fields tab.
2. On the left side of the Fields dialog box are the fields in
the report. On the right side are the fields not in the
report. Highlight the field on the right that you wish to
see in the report.
Note: The book view can show up to 20 fields, including
combined fields. The book view can also display the
name field of a connected item. You can define the
number of lines provided for each field and, optionally,
a label to be displayed for each field. See Fields Tab
(Book views) for more details.
3. To put the field at the end of the report, select the
Append Field button. The field will be placed at the
end of the report.
4. To place the field somewhere in the middle of the
report, in the Fields In Report list box, highlight the
field you want the new field to be above and then select
the Insert button. The field will be moved above the
highlighted field.
5. To add a combined field (multiple fields on one line) to
a report, highlight the first field you want to include in
the combined field and select the Combine Fields
button.
6. Select OK to make the changes.
Note: This change is just temporary. If you close the view
without saving it, the change will be lost. To make the
changes permanent, save the view with View-Save
View or select Yes when Commence asks to save
changes to the view.
 
 
 
 
 
To see a field that isn't shown in the active calendar
view:
1. With the calendar view open and active, select
Customize-Design View and select the Fields tab.
2. On the left side of the dialog box, there are drop
down list boxes. In each of the drop-down list boxes
select the field you wish to display. Up to 5 fields to be
displayed on the calendar view.
3. Select OK to make the changes.
Note: This change is just temporary.
If you close the view without saving it, the change will be
lost. To make the changes permanent, save the view with
View-Save View or select Yes when Commence asks to
save changes to the view.
 
 
 
 
The Gantt view is a special view. For the Gantt view, you can only
change the fields used to display the time bars.
Set Report Field Options Dialog Box
Type a font name and font size in the Font Name and Font Size
text boxes, or select from the associated drop-down list boxes.
The valid font names and sizes in the list box reflect the fonts you
have installed in Windows. You can also change the font style to
Bold, Italic, and/or Underline by selecting the appropriate check
boxes. The Font Appearance box shows you what the selected
font and style look like. Select OK once you've made your
selections.
Set the size of the area in which a field's contents will appear in
the report, enter the appropriate number of characters into the
Width text box, and the appropriate number of lines into the
Height text box. This box originally contains the options set when
the field was added to the active category.
Note that the height of a connected field is grayed out and cannot
be changed from this dialog box. You can change this optoin by
selecting the Customize-Design View command, then selecting
the Display tab. You may want to do this in particular if one or
more of your connected fields contains more connected item
names than can fit in the default field height.
Set the amount of indentation for a field by entering a
measurement into the Indentation text box.
You can label individual field values with the name of the field by
turning on the Include Field Label check box. The field label will
be shown as if it were part of the field data, just before the field
value on the report. This is unlike the Show Labels setting,
where the labels are included on the left side of a vertical format
report and across the top of a horizontal format report
Remove blank lines from within large text fields in a report by
turning on the Remove Embedded Blank Lines check box.
Removing blank lines is particularly useful when printing labels.
Blank lines may occur in an item if one or more fields do not
contain a value. Turning this check box on eliminates blank lines
within items while maintaining the space between items. Blank
spaces are not removed, however, from the end of a field; i.e., if
the space allocated for a field is too big for the field, blank lines
will appear at the end of the field, regardless of the setting of this
check box.
Reverse names in text fields that are in the "last name, first
name" format by turning on the Reverse Name check box.
Set the alignment of a field in the report column in which it
appears. A field may be left justified, centered, or right justified.
Choose the appropriate radio button from the Alignment radio
group. For example, to line up the decimal point in a currency
value, the field must be right justified.
To calculate field summaries on selected calculation and number
fields in a report, check one or both choices from the Calculation
checkboxes. The Total checkbox sums up the field value for all
the items in the view. The Average checkbox sums up the field
value for all items in the view, then divides by the total number of
items in the view. To view the field summary, open the report view
then select Tools - Field Summary from the menu.
Filtering on One Field
If you wish to find a subset of items based on the value of a
single field in the active category or the name of a connected
item:
1. Select Customize-Filter View This will display the Filter1 tab.
2. Determine whether to filter on a value in the active category,
or on a connected item.
To filter on a value in the active category:
A. Highlight the field you wish to filter on in the Filter for All
Items box. The Filter by box will display (Field value).
B. Enter the value to filter on and how to filter it. Methods of
filtering a field depend on the field type.
For a calculation, number, or sequence number field type,
the comparison operators are equal to, not equal to, less
than, greater than, and is between. Select the comparison
you wish to make from the drop down list and enter a
numeric comparison value in the text box.
For a check box field, select the appropriate radio button to
filter. You can choose if the value is Checked or Not
Checked.
For a date field, the comparison operators are before, on,
after, is between and is blank. Select the comparison you
wish to make from the drop down list and type a
comparison value (in the appropriate date format selected
via the Windows Control Panel) in the text box. You can
also use natural language date as a value, as described in
Natural Language Dates. For example, to find items with
Today's date, select On and enter "today" in the text box.
For name, telephone, and text fields, the comparison
operators are equals, contains, does not contain, and is
blank. Select the comparison you wish to make from the
drop down list and enter a comparison value. For example,
to filter on all items that have "Ask Bill" in the Notes field,
select Contains and enter "Ask Bill" in the text box. Note:
For Name and Text fields, you can select the Options
button. This allows you to filter for all or one of up to 10
different strings.
C. Select the OK button. The view will now be filtered.
To filter on item connected to a particular item (for example, all
appointments attended by Bill Smith):
A. Highlight the connection you wish to filter on in the Filter for
All Items box, and select the field in the connected category
you want to make the comparison to from the Filter By drop
down list box.
B. Select the item you wish to filter on.
C. Select the OK button. The view will now contain all the items
connected to the item you selected
Filtering on More than One Field
If you wish to find a subset of items based on the values two or
more fields in the active category or the names of a connected
items:
1. Select Customize-Filter View .
2. Select the Summary tab, then choose the next available filter.
3. Determine if you want to filter on a value in the active
category, or on a connected item.
To filter on a value in the active category:
1. Highlight the field you wish to filter on in the Filter for All
Items box. The Filter By box will display (Field value).
2. Enter the value to filter on and how to filter it. Methods of
filtering a field depend on the field type.
For a calculation, number, or sequence number field type, the
comparison operators are equal to, not equal to, less than,
greater than, and is between. Select the comparison you wish
to make from the drop down list and enter a numeric
comparison value in the text box.
For a check box field, select the appropriate radio button to
filter. You can choose if the value is Checked or Not
Checked.
For a date field, the comparison operators are before, on,
after, is between and is blank.. Select the comparison you
want to make from the drop down list and type a comparison
value (in the appropriate date format selected via the Windows
Control Panel) into the text box. You can also use natural
language date as a value, as described in Natural Language
Dates. For example, to find items with Today's date, select the
on button and enter "today" in the text box.
For name, telephone, and text fields, the comparison
operators are equals, contains, does not contain, and is blank.
Select the comparison you want to make from the drop down
list and enter a comparison value. For example, to filter on all
items that have "Ask Bill" in the Notes field, select the
Contains button and enter "Ask Bill" in the text box. Note: For
Name and Text fields, you can select the Options button. This
allows you to filter for all or one of up to 10 different strings.
3. Select the OK button.
4. Follow the process for the other fields you wish to filter.
5. Use the And and Or radio group to form a filter.
6. Use the Not check box to reverse the sense of a filter.
7. When completed, select OK to filter the view.
To filter if an item is connected to a particular item in a
connecting category:
1. Highlight the connection you wish to filter on in the Filter for
All Items box.
2. Select the item you wish to filter on.
3. Select the OK button.
4. Follow the process to achieve the filter you want.
5. When completed, select OK to filter the view.
Filtering on a Date Range
Filtering on a date range involves specifying two values to
be compared to the same field. For example, you may
need to see a list of your To-Dos due during a particular
week. You would need to filter the calendar on the Date
field using the Customize-Filter View command. One value
specifies the items with Dates After the last day of the last
week and the second with Dates Before the first day of
the next week. Combining these two values with the “Is
Between” comparison operator gives you a view of only
To-Dos due during the week.
To set a filter for a date range (for example, September
19th through September 25th):
1. Display the view for the category for which you are
setting a date range.
Make sure the category contains date fields to filter on
and contains data that will pass through the filter.
2. Select Customize-Filter View from the menu or select
the mage/filter_shg.gif button on the tool bar
3. To set the filter, select the Filter1 tab.
4. In the Filter for All Items list box, select the date field
you wish to base the filter on.
5. Select Is Between as the comparison value from the
drop down list of comparison values.
6. Enter the values you desire for the Minimum Value
(beginning of the date range) and Maximum Value
(end of the date range).
7. Select the Save button.
Your view is re-displayed containing only items whose
dates fall in the range you specified in the filter.
Note: This change is just temporary. If you close the view
without saving it, the change will be lost. To make the
changes permanent, save the view with View-Save
View or select Yes when Commence asks to save
changes to the view.
Finding Items with Blank Fields
To locate items that have no value in a field, use the Is Blank
comparison operator. This operator can be used for a number of
different field types, including Text, Time, Date, Calculation, and
Telephone type fields.
1. Display the view you wish to filter. For help, see Opening a
View.
2. Select the Customize-Filter View command from the menu
bar. To set the filter, select the Filter1 tab.
If you are creating more than one filter select the Summary tab.
3. In the Filter for All Items list box, select the date field to filter
on.
4. Select the Is Blank comparison operator from the drop down
list.
5. Select the Save button.
This returns you to the active view and the filter will be in effect.
Some field types are defined with specific allowed values and
therefore can never have blank values. This applies to Check
Box, Selection, Sequence Number, Number, Name, and
Connected item Name fields. Select a field type below to see a
description of filtering for blank values for some of the special
field types listed above:
Number
Connections
 
The remaining field types cannot be filtered; this includes Data
File, Excel cell, and Image fields.
Global Search Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Tools-Global
Search command.
 
To use the dialog box, type the text you want to search for in the
Search Text text box and select the Start Search button The
label on this button then changes to Stop Search.
 
The Global Search dialog box contains these elements:
SEARCH TEXT
Type the text for which you want to search into this text box. You
can use a question mark wildcard to substitute for any single
character in the search text, and an asterisk (*) to substitute for
one or more characters. For example, typing "12/*/06" tells
Commence to look for any number of characters between the
slashes. Typing "12/?/06" tells Commence to look for exactly one
character between the slashes. Typing "12/??/06" tells
Commence to look for exactly two characters between the
slashes.
 
To search the database for multiple values, such as John or Joe
or Sue or Mary, you could create a multi–layered text string (for
example, John.OR.Joe OR.Sue.OR.Mary). By specifying text
strings in combination using the Boolean .AND. and .OR.
operators, Commence will now search the active database for
these text strings and return those items that meet the specified
criteria. Notice that there are periods around the Boolean
Operators. This is to distinguish the Boolean Operators AND and
OR from the text strings AND and OR. Additionally, Boolean
Operators are case sensitive, and must be entered as Upper
Case in order for Commence to identify them as Boolean
Operators.
MATCH
Select the degree of fuzziness to use for search. An "Exact"
match will find text that is just as you have entered it in the
Search Text box. "Fuzzy", "Fuzzier" and "Fuzziest" make ever
greater allowances for possible misspellings. Fuzzy searches are
always case insensitive.
MATCH CASE
Turn on this check box to specify an exact match of the case
used in the search text. For example, with Match Case turned on,
the search text "paul" may select a different set of items than the
search text "Paul". This check box is turned off by default.
FIND WHOLE WORDS ONLY
By default, Commence searches for any item that has a field
containing the search text; other text can also appear in the field.
Marking the Find whole words only checkbox means that you
only want to see items having a field whose entire contents
exactly matches the search text. No other text can appear in the
field.
# ITEMS FOUND
After you select the Start Search button, this list box displays the
name fields of all items matching the text string. The label on the
list box changes to reflect the number of matching items found.
Up to 500 item names can be displayed. If a global search
produces more than 500 matches, only the first 500 are
displayed.
 
Information about the currently highlighted item in this list is
displayed in the Information on Highlighted Item group box
(see below). You can display an item detail of the highlighted item
by double-clicking the left mouse button over the name of the
item, or by selecting the Display Item button.
 
If the name of an item appearing in the list changes (because of
edits performed while the Global Search dialog box is open), the
changed name is reflected in the list.
SEARCH STATUS
Indicates the status of the current, or last, search. If no search
has yet been performed, it is blank.
INFORMATION...
Displays a summary of the item currently highlighted in the #
Items Found list box, including the Category of the item, the
Matching Field in which the search text was found, and the
contents (Text) of that field.
START SEARCH
This button starts a search using the current Search Text. Once a
search is begun, the label on the button changes to Stop Search,
which you can use to stop the current search. If you cancel a
search that is in progress, the button label changes to Resume
Search; using this button will restart the search where you left off.
The button label returns to Start Search once you change the
Search Text, Categories, Case Sensitive, or Contains/Equals
settings.
CATEGORIES
Select this button to alter the list of categories searched. It
displays the Select Search Categories dialog box . By default, all
categories are searched.
DISPLAY ITEM
Highlight an item in the # Items Found list box and select this
button to display an item detail of the item. (Alternatively, you can
double-click the left mouse button over the name of the item.)
CLOSE
Select this button to close the Global Search dialog box. The
current Search Text is lost once you do this.
 
Note: The # Items Found list box displayed by the Global
Search dialog box is not updated if you do a global search and
then edit or add an item or items that will now match the
previously performed global search. You will have to search again
to add the item(s) to the list. Item deletions, however, are
immediately reflected in the # Items Found list box.
 
Shortcut: To display the item detail of an item in the list box,
double-click the left mouse button over the item name.
Page Setup Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed by the Page Setup command.
 
Select the Add button to create a new paper layout. To edit, copy,
or delete a paper layout, highlight a layout name in the Paper
Layout list box and then select the appropriate button.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse pointer on the name of a layout
in the Paper Layout list box to edit it without selecting the Edit
button.
ADD
Displays the Add Paper Layout dialog box.
EDIT
Displays the Edit Paper Layout dialog box, filled in with all the
details of the currently highlighted layout in the Paper Layouts
list box.
COPY
Displays the Copy Paper Layout dialog box, filled in with all the
details (except the name) of the currently highlighted layout in
the Paper Layouts list box.
DELETE
Deletes the currently highlighted layout in the Paper Layouts list
box.
SET DEFAULT
Selects the currently highlighted layout in the Paper Layouts list
box as the default to be used when printing.
DEFAULT PAPER LAYOUT
Selects Displays the current default paper layout. Whenever a
Print Options dialog box is displayed, the default layout appears
in the Paper Layout drop down list. Use the Set Default button to
change the default paper layout.
OK
Closes the Page Setup dialog box.
Add/Edit/Copy Paper Layout Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Add, Edit, or
Copy button on the Page Setup dialog box. To use the dialog
box, fill in any missing information, accept or change any default
values, and select the Save button.
 
To include the print title (if one is defined) for the active view on
each printed page of view output, turn on the Include Title check
box in the Header group box. To include today's date on each
printed page of output, turn on the And Date check box.
LAYOUT NAME
Type or edit a name for the paper layout. The name can be up to
35 alphanumeric characters.
ORIENTATION
Select the Portrait radio button to use the longer edge of the
paper as the vertical side, or select the Landscape radio button
to use the shorter edge of the paper as the vertical side. The
default for adding a layout is Portrait.
PAGE
Select a paper size for the layout from the Paper drop-down list
box. You can choose from the many standard paper sizes
included with Commence, or select Custom to specify a non-
standard Width and Height (these text boxes are otherwise
uneditable). The radio buttons at the bottom of the Page group
box specify the measuring system (Inches or Centimeters) used
for the currently selected paper size; this setting affects all the
measurements on the dialog box.
REGIONS
Enter the number of Columns and Rows for the layout.
Commence will pick a Width and/or Height that spreads the
columns out evenly over the page, but you can pick other values.
If the number of Columns or Rows is 1, the column width or row
height defaults to the page width or page height (minus margins),
and cannot be changed. Note that the settings in the Regions
group box change as you change the settings in the Page group
box.
INTERNAL MARGINS
These text boxes specify measurements from the Left, Right,
Top, and Bottom edges of a single Region, defining the printed
area of the region. The measuring system depends on the radio
button selected in the Page group box. Edit the internal margins
by selecting the appropriate box(es) and editing the text. The
default margin settings for all internal margins when adding a
layout is 0 (no internal margins).
HEADER
Check the Include Title check box to add a header containing
the view title (specified via the Customize-Design View-Display
command) to the printout. If Include Title is checked, you can
also check And Date to add today's date to the header. The
default when adding a layout is to include both the title and the
date.
MARGINS
These text boxes specify measurements from the Left, Right,
Top, and Bottom edges of the page, defining the printed area of
the page. The measuring system used depends on the radio
button selected in the Page group box. Edit the layout margins
by selecting the appropriate box(es) and changing the numbers.
The default margin settings for all four margins when adding a
layout is 1 inch or 2.54 centimeters.
SAMPLE
This non-selectable area allows you to preview the paper layout
design as you enter information into the dialog box. A
specification typed into a text box is reflected in the Sample as
soon as you move the insertion point from the text box (e.g.,
when you press the Tab key or move the insertion point with the
mouse).
PRINTER
Select the Printer... button to associate a printer with this paper
layout. A Select Printer dialog box will be displayed, the selected
printer will be used whenever this paper layout is used for
printing. If you select no printer for a paper layout (or if you
select "Commence Printer" from the list) the default Windows
printer will be used. To determine the default Windows printer,
see the Printers section of the Windows Control Panel.
SAVE
Select the Save button to save your selections as a paper layout
under the Layout Name specified. If your specifications are
outside the capacity of the currently selected page size, a
message box is displayed that points out the error(s) and asks
you to try again.
CANCEL
Select this button to cancel the Paper Layout dialog box and
discard the current specifications.
 
If your margin specifications are outside the margins of the
currently selected page size, a message box is displayed that
points out the incorrectly specified margin(s) and asks you to try
again.
Print Dialog Box
The Print dialog box is displayed while Commence is printing a
view or item detail. Select Cancel to cancel the print operation.
Once the print job is completed, this dialog box disappears.
Dialing a Telephone Number
If you have a modem, and Windows Telephony (TAPI)
installed, you can have Commence dial the telephone for
you.
To dial a telephone number:
1. If the number shows in the view, highlight the item.
If the telephone number is not visible, double click on the
item to open it's form.
2. Select the Dial Phone command on the Home tab.
Note: You can dial any number from a detail form by
double clicking on a phone number field or by
highlighting a phone number in a text field and
selecting the Dial button.
3. If there is more than one telephone number entered for
the item you are trying to place a call to, the Select
Telephone Number dialog box appears. Select the
telephone number you would like to call and select the
Dial button.
4. The Commence Dialing dialog box shows the number
being dialed. It also displays a Hang Up button and a
Change Options button. The Hang Up button allows
you to terminate the dialing by disconnecting the
modem. The Change Options button allows you to
change the dialing options via TAPI.
You can pick the phone up at any point after it has dialed.
Logging a Phone Call
Logging a phone call is similar to logging a letter. It tracks
your phone calls, who they were to, their duration (in
minutes), what they where about, date, time, etc. It
automatically connects the log item to the item you are
dialing. The Notes/History category is used when you log a
call.
You can log a call even if Commence did not dial it. If you
are using a modem, read this entire topic. If not, you can
manually log a call.
To log a call not dialed through Commence, select the Dial
button on the tool bar. Skip to step 4 below and continue
reading for a description of the process.
 
To log a phone call dialed using Commence:
1. Select the Edit-Preferences... command. Select the
Event Logs tab. Set your preferences for when you
would like to log phone calls. There are two options, if
Phone Call is answered and if Phone Call is not
answered. You may select both options.
Note: If both checkbox , Phone Call is answered and
Phone Call is not answered, are not marked, all
phone calls must be logged manually.
2. Dial the number as described in Dialing a Telephone
Number.
3. Select the Talk button in the ATSP Call Status dialog
box. A phone log form appears, if the option Phone
Call is answered was chosen.
Select the Hang Up button in the ATSP Call Status dialog
box. A phone log form appears, if the option Phone
Call is not answered was chosen.
4. In the Date field, the date will automatically be
specified as Today. This changes to the current date
when you move to the next field.
5. When you have completed your selections in the form,
select the Save button.
Tool Bar Pick Trigger
Tool Bar Pick triggers provide a way to manually initiate an
agent. It fires when you select the button on the tool bar
associated with the trigger.
Tool Bar Pick triggers are added as new buttons to the agent tool
bar. Use the Button drop-down list box to select the icon to use
as an identifier on the button. Select the position of the button in
the Position drop-down list box. Only the unused positions for
that desktop will appear in the Position drop-down list box.
Commence checks for any active agents that use Tool Bar Pick
triggers, then makes sure the positions they use will not appear in
the list. You can also define a specific desktop on which the agent
will appear and a keyboard hotkey.
You can enter Help Text that will be associated with the button
(when the mouse is over the tool bar button, the help text will
appear on the status bar). This is a useful way to remind yourself
of what the agent does.
A Tool Bar Pick trigger can be associated with a specific
category (e.g., Person/Company) using the Active Category
drop-down list box. If you make this association, then the button
is only enabled when either a view of the category or an item
detail from the category has the focus. If you pick the button when
a different a view or detail from a different category is active, you
will get a message box reminding you that the button is not
enabled for that category.
A Tool Bar Pick trigger that is associated with a specific category
passes data from a single item in that category as the trigger
item. This trigger item is either the selected data item in the active
view, or the item from an active item detail.
If you check All Categories, then you can always select the
menu pick, regardless of the active category, however, you will
not easily be able to pass data to be used in the conditions or the
actions.
Database Password Dialog Box
See Also
The database you are opening with the Open/Manage Database
command is password-protected.
 
Enter the password for the database in the Password text box
and select the OK button. When you enter the correct password,
the database is opened. If you do not know the password select
the Cancel button.
Caution: If you use the Open/Manage Database command to
back up a database and then later restore from the backup file
created, you can access the restored database only if you use
the password that was in effect at the time the backup was
made.
Database Protection
Commence provides several ways of protecting your data from
being accessed by unauthorized users:
 
Database Scrambling
All of the information in a Commence database is scrambled
automatically by Commence. As a result, no one can easily scan
the database files on disk and read your data. This database
scrambling is done behind the scenes and requires no action on
your part.
Database Passwords
You can assign a password to a database to prevent someone
from turning on your PC and opening the database from within
Commence without your knowledge. After you assign a
password to a database, you will need to enter the password
each time you attempt to open the database.
Password-Protecting a Database
Any database can be password protected. To password protect a
database, follow the steps below:
 
1. Open the database you want to password protect using the
Open/Manage Database command.
2. Select the Edit-Preferences-Database command.
3. In the Database Password group box turn on the
Password Protect Database check box.
4. To set (or change) your password, select the Set Password
button. The Change Database Password dialog box
appears.
5. If this is the first time this database has been password
protected, the Old Password field is grayed out. Otherwise,
type your current password in the Old Password field.
6. Type the password you want into the New Password text
box. The characters you type are echoed with asterisks in
the text box.
7. Type the password again into the Verify Password text box.
8. If you correctly entered the Old Password (if any), and
entered the same password into the New and Verify
Password text boxes, Commence returns you to the
Database tab. If you made a mistake, Commence displays a
message box asking you to try again. Select OK and go
back to Step 4.
9. Select Done to close and save the Database tab.
Opening a Password-Protected Database
The open database is now password-protected. The next time
you attempt to open this (or any) password-protected database,
the Database Password dialog box is displayed.
 
Enter the password you chose in Step 6 above and select OK.
When you enter the correct password, the database is opened.
Caution: If you use the Open/Manage Database command to
backup a database and then later restore from the backup file
created, you can access the restored database only if you use
the password that was in effect at the time the backup was
made.
Save/Save As/Edit View Dialog Box
These dialog boxes are displayed when you select the Views-
Save View, or Views-Save View As command. The Edit View
dialog box is displayed when you select View-Open/Manage
Views, then select the Edit button.
 
This dialog box contains these elements:
VIEW NAME
The View Name (if any) of the active view is shown in the View
Name text box; view names are limited to 30 characters.
VIEW ICON LABEL
The View Icon Label text box displays the label that the view's
icon will have if it is displayed on the view bar (see the Display
on View Bar check box below). You can change the contents of
the text box as you see fit. Icon labels are limited to 10
characters. As delivered, default labels are defined only for the
pre-defined views that appear on the view bar.
ICON
The Icon drop-down list box shows the current icon for the view.
The default icon for a view reflects the view type of the view. You
can change the current icon by selecting one from the drop-
down list box.
 
Note: The icons displayed in the Icon drop-down list box include
both internal Commence icons and external icons that you can
supply. Commence searches the active database directory and
the central icon directory (if one is defined) for all files with a .ico
extension and displays the first 500 icons it finds in the list box.
If you specify an icon in a .ico file for a view icon and this file
cannot be found when the icon is needed, Commence uses the
default icon for the type of the view. See the Edit-Preferences-
Tool Bars command for more information on using external
icons.
DISPLAY ON VIEW BAR
The Display on View Bar check box, if turned on, indicates that
the active view is currently marked to appear on the view bar. If
it is turned off, the active view is currently not marked to appear
on the view bar.
 
Use this option for frequently used views as an alternative to
using the View-Open/Manage Views command or placing views
on the Views menu (see below). Up to 40 view icons can appear
on the view bar. To add the active view to the view bar, turn on
the Display on View Bar check box; to remove the active view
from the view bar, turn the check box off.
 
When you click the left mouse button on an icon on the view bar,
the associated view is opened. If that view is already opened,
clicking the left mouse button makes the view active. Clicking
the right mouse button on the view icon opens another instance
of a view. Multiple instances of a view have a colon and a
number appended to their view titles. The number displayed
increases from 1 as new instances are opened.
 
If a view does not have a label, no default label is assigned to it.
If you don't choose a label for a view and you place that view on
the view bar, no label will appear for the view when the view bar
is displayed with labels.
 
Note that you can choose whether or not to display the view bar
itself by selecting the Edit-Preferences-Tool Bars command.
DISPLAY ON VIEW MENU
The Display on Menu Bar check box, if turned on, indicates that
the name of the active view currently appears on the Views
menu. If it is turned off, the active view's name does not
currently appear on the Views menu.
 
Selecting a view name from the Views menu opens the view.
Use this option for frequently used views as an alternative to
using the View-Open/Manage View command. Up to 16 view
names can appear on the Views menu. To add the active view to
the Views menu, turn on the Display on Menu Bar check box;
to remove the active view from the Views menu, turn the check
box off.
OK
Select the OK button to save the view and return to the work
area.
CANCEL
Select the Cancel button to return to the work area without
saving the view.
Message Log Dialog Box
When you select the Help-Message Log command, Commence
displays the Message Log dialog box.
 
This dialog box displays a log of the messages that have been
posted to the status bar. These messages include informational
messages displayed by commands and agents as they execute
that will help you diagnose and correct problems encountered in
Commence. The entries for agent actions correspond to the firing
of an agent's trigger. The date and time is shown, along with the
name of the agent. If the agent operated normally, the word
"Fired" is shown after the name. If an error occurred, the type of
error is noted after the agent name.
 
Use the scroll bar on the right side of the Messages list box to
move through the list.
 
Turn on one or more of the check boxes in the Show Message
Level and Show Message Type group boxes to select the
message level and type of messages you want to see. This does
not affect what is stored in the log, but only what you see in the
Messages list box. Not all messages are written to the Message
Log. The Log only includes messages from agents, Sync Link
In/Out, and Transfer.
 
Select the OK button to return to the work area.
Configuring Your Word Processor for Use with
Commence
See Also
Summary
Commence lets you use your favorite text editor and word
processor for writing letters. These letters can contain
information from a Commence database.
 
You can write a letter that contains information from the currently
highlighted item using the Send Letter command on the Home
menu; or, you can write multiple letters (one for each item in the
active view) using the same Send Letter command.
 
After selecting one of these commands, you then choose a
template for the letter. Letter templates specify common text for
letters as well as the field codes used to pull information from the
item(s) selected (see above). Commence supplies several
sample letter templates; you can also add your own templates to
Commence.
 
Commence launches the text editor or word processor
application with which the template was created. You can make
changes to the letter from within the selected application.
Commence pulls the information specified in the template from
the item or view, as appropriate, and uses this information in the
letter(s). You can then print or fax the letter(s) for delivery to the
recipient(s).
 
Sending a Fax from Commence
If you have WinFax installed on your system, you can fax a letter
from Commence instead of printing it. The recipient's fax number
is retrieved from Commence and sent to the fax software and the
selected letter(s) are faxed automatically.
 
Configuring a Text Editor
Commence comes configured to use Windows Write for
unformatted (text) letters. If you want to use a Windows-based
text editor other than Write, simply specify another one via the
Letters tab under preferences. This is the only configuration step
necessary in order to use a text editor to write letters from
Commence.
 
Configuring a Word Processor
To use a formatted word processor and take advantage of all the
special features that word processors provide, you must
configure both Commence and the word processor.
 
Basically, you need to tell Commence about the word processor
you want to use and install macros for your word processor that
will allow it (through Windows' Dynamic Data Exchange) to pull
information into your letters from Commence.
 
The help topic for the Letters tab tells you how to specify the
word processor you want to use with Commence.
 
When installing Commence you will be asked which word
processor(s) you use. If you select your word processor at this
time, Commence will automatically set your preferences and
install the macros for you. If you skipped this step during
installation, or if you’ve installed a new word processor after
Commence was installed, then you should reinstall Commence.
Send Letter Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Send Letter
command. Choose the letter template you want to use for your
letter and choose the View button to edit the template; select the
Print button to print the letter. To log the letter, turn on the Log
check box and optionally type in a name for the log item.
 
The Send Letter dialog box contains these elements:
SEND LETTER TO
This option enables a letter to be sent to the selected item or to
all items in the active view.
TEMPLATES LIST BOX
This list box shows the names and Types of all templates
available for use with the active category. Select which letter you
want to send by highlighting one of the templates in the list.
 
Commence provides some initial templates, but you will probably
want to customize these or create new ones. The details of
setting up and using both text and formatted letter templates are
discussed in Customize-Database-Letter Template.
DESTINATION (Word 2000/XP)
This displays the possible destinations for the merged letter,
label, or envelope template. Select where the letter should be
sent after it has been merged. Current options include Printer,
FAX, Draft or E-Mail.
APPLICATIONS (Word 97)
This displays the word processor applications that were installed
when you installed Commence. If you have added any word
processor applications since Commence was installed, you will
need to re-install Commence.
When you create a letter, you can also choose to log it by turning
on the Log check box. Logging creates a letter log item that is
connected to the recipient and contains other information about
the letter. See your Event Logs Preference for details.
MERGE BUTTON
When the Preview button is checked, this button enables you to
type the body of your letter or to preview the letter and make
changes before sending it. Any field codes in the letter will be
filled in with the data from the item that was highlighted when you
chose Send Letter.
If you select a template with a Type of TXT (a plain text file) and
chose Merge in the dialog box, Commence launches your
preferred text word processor with the text file. At that point, you
can convert the letter into the native format of the word processor
(usually the word processor offers you this option when it reads in
the file.) From the word processor, you can edit the letter
(including adding whatever formatting is supported by the word
processor), print it, and/or save it as a normal word processor file.
If you select a formatted template (i.e., a file with a Type other
than TXT, such as DOC or SAM) and chose Merge in the dialog
box, Commence sends DDE messages to the word processor
instructing it to copy the template into a new document file and
then retrieve the needed data field values from Commence. (The
data field substitution is done by a macro running in the word
processor which communicates with Commence to get the
needed data values.) After the data values are substituted into the
document, Commence maximizes the word processor and you
can manually edit, print, or save the new letter.
 
When the Preview button is cleared, and you select a TXT
template and chose Merge, Commence creates a text letter by
replacing the Field Codes in the template with data values from
the highlighted item in the active view and displays the Print
Letter dialog box.
If you select a formatted template and chose Merge, Commence
sends DDE messages to the word processor instructing it to copy
the template into a new document file and then retrieve the
needed data field values from Commence. (The data field
substitution is done by a macro running in the word processor
which communicates with Commence to get the needed data
values.) After the data values are substituted into the document,
the word processor prints the document and closes the file. Note
that the printed document will be formatted with whatever
formatting you have specified in the template file.
If you want to cancel printing a formatted letter, you must first
interrupt the word processor macro and then cancel the print job.
How you cancel a macro depends on the macro language of the
word processor; pressing the ESC key cancels a macro in Word
for Windows and WordPerfect.
The letter prints on the default printer selected for the word
processor.
Note: If you want to specify other print options for a formatted
letter (e.g., print multiple copies, print a subsection of the letter
etc.) use the Preview option to create the letter, and then use the
word processor directly to enter the options.
PREVIEW
This option enables the merged letter template to be viewed
before sending it to its destination.
INCLUDE MERGED DOCUMENT WITH LOG ITEM
This option enables the document containing the merged letter
template to be saved with the Log item stored in Commence.
When this option is cleared, only the Log item is created, without
the actual document.
CUSTOM LETTER FILENAME
You can type a full path or file name for a letter in this text box. If
you enter a full path into the Custom Letter Filename text box,
then Commence saves the letter in the location specified by the
path. If you enter only a file name, then the letter is saved to a
default directory specified via Edit-Preferences-Letters.
--
CANCEL BUTTON
Select the Cancel button to return to the work area.
Customize-Database-Letter Template
See Also
Use this command to display the Letter Template tab, from which
you can add templates, edit existing templates, and delete
templates. Commence provides some initial templates, but you
will probably want to customize these or create new ones.
 
Letter templates are used as the guideline for creating form
letters. Letter templates can contain ordinary text (the body of the
letter) as well as Field Codes that represent field values from
items in a given category in Commence (like the
Person/Company category). Each letter template is associated
with a specific category, and can only be used to send letters to
items in that category. All templates are word processor files that
are stored in the tmplts subdirectory of your active database
directory. Commence letter template filenames always start with
the letters PIM followed by some numbers, and have an
extension of .TXT or whatever is appropriate for your word
processor.
 
Commence supports two types of letter templates, text templates
and formatted templates. You can use text templates with or
without an external word processor. Text templates produce ASCII
text letters, which are useful for transmitting letters electronically
or for simple memos. Text templates cannot contain graphics or
formatted text (i.e. bold, italic, etc.)
 
Formatted templates are more customizable and can take
advantage of the word processor features which allow you to use
graphics and different fonts in your letter template. Formatted
letter templates can only be used if you have a word processor
that has a macro language and supports both client and server
modes of DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange). Commence currently
provides macros for three such word processors: Microsoft Word
and WordPerfect for Windows.
Select Telephone Number Dialog Box
This dialog box, displayed when you select the Dial button, allows
you to choose from among multiple telephone numbers displayed
in an open view or item detail.
 
The list box shows the field labels of the telephone fields in the
active view or item detail. Highlight one of the numbers and select
the Dial button to have your modem dial the number contained in
the named field.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the left mouse button while pointing at one
of the field labels to dial the number without selecting the Dial
button.
 
Once you select the number to dial, the Commence Dialing dialog
box is displayed.
 
Select the Cancel button to return to the active view or item detail
without dialing a number.
Commence Dialing Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box displays the phone number that is being dialed.
Depending on how you set your dialing preferences (see Dialer
Preferences), this phone number may include access codes as
well as the number in the telephone field.
 
Selecting the Change Options button allows you to change the
dialing options via TAPI.
 
You can pick the phone up at any point after it has dialed. Select
the Talk button in the ATSP Call Status dialog box to start the
phone conversation with the other party.
 
Selecting the Hang Up button in the ATSP Call Status dialog box
allows you to terminate the dialing by disconnecting the modem.
Configuring MS Outlook Address Book
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Edit-
Preferences-Other Apps command.
 
Microsoft Outlook is an electronic mail package included with
Windows. Multiple MAPI compliant mail systems can plug into MS
Outlook in order to provide a single, consistent interface for
electronic mail. Since MS Outlook operates as a front–end for
multiple and possibly very different mail systems, there are some
associated inherent problems. As an example, each mail system
typically has its own address book, which leads to difficultly in
locating an individual’s address, as well as potential redundant
data.
 
Commence solves this problem by providing its users with a
universal MAPI–compliant address book. A specified category
within Commence may now be accessed by Microsoft Outlook for
use as an Address Book for such applications as addressing
electronic mail messages, faxing documents, etc. This eliminates
the need to enter duplicate information into both Commence and
Outlook. To use this option:
 
1. From the Configure Commence as: combo box, select
Microsoft Outlook address book.
2. Select the category you want to use as an address book.
Usually, this is the Person category.
3. In order for MS Outlook to access the correct address
information within a Commence category, the fields used by
Outlook must be mapped to the fields in the Commence
category. Double click on the desired MS Outlook Type field
on the left side of the form, or highlight the desired MS
Outlook Type field on the left and select Edit.
4. Select the corresponding Commence Field from the Combo
Box. Select OK when done.
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 for all remaining MS Outlook Type
fields that are to map to Commence Fields. Only those fields
that will be used need to be mapped.
6. When all MS Outlook Type fields have been mapped to
Commence Fields, select Done to save the configuration.
 
Performing the steps below will add the Commence Address
Book to the Microsoft Outlook Profile.
7. Run the Windows Control Panel.
8. Double click on the Mail and Fax icon. The MS Outlook
Settings Properties dialog box will be displayed. Select the
Services tab.
9. Select the Add button. A list of available services will be
displayed.
10. Highlight the Commence Address Book selection. Select
OK to add the Commence Address Book to the Outlook
profile.
 
Performing the steps below will configure the default Microsoft
Outlook Address Book to be the Commence Address Book.
11. The MS Outlook Settings Properties dialog box should
still be displayed. (If not, repeat steps 7 and 8 above.) Select
the Addressing Tab.
12. From the Show this address list first: pull–down menu,
select Commence Address Book.
13. From the Keep personal addresses in: pull–down menu,
select Commence Address Book.
14. Click on the Add button.
15. Highlight Commence Address Book and click on the Add
button.
16. Click on Close.
17. The Commence Address Book is now shown in the list of
Address Books for the When sending mail, check names
using these address lists in the following order: option.
18. Move the Commence Address Book to the top of the list.
19. Select OK.
20. Select OK again, and then close the Windows Control
Panel
Microsoft Outlook is now configured to use the information
maintained within Commence as an Address Book, called
Commence Address Book.
Print Setup Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed by the Print Setup command or by
the Printer button in the Add/Edit Paper Layout dialog box.
This command allows you to setup your printers.
 
 
 
 
 
Menu Pick Trigger
A Menu Pick trigger
is manually controlled: it fires when you select the menu pick
associated with the trigger. Menu Pick triggers are added as new
menu entries on the Home
menu. You enter the text of the menu item in the Menu Text text
box.
You can also enter Help Text that is associated with the entry
(when the highlight is over the menu pick, the help text appears
on the status bar).
The help text is useful to remind you of the agent's
purpose. You can also define which desktop
the agent will appear and a keyboard hotkey.
 
A Menu Pick trigger can be associated with a specific category
(e.g., Person/Company) using the Active Category drop-down
list box.
If you make this association, then the menu item is only enabled
when
either a view of the category or an item detail from that category
is
active. If another category is active, the menu item is grayed out.
If
you check All Categories, then
the menu pick can always be selected, regardless of the active
category.
 
A Menu Pick trigger that is
associated with a category passes data from a single item
in that category as trigger data. This trigger item is either the
selected data item in a view, or the data item from the displayed
item detail
that has the focus.
 
 
 
 
Agent Tab
This tab is displayed when you select the Customize-Database-
Agent command.
 
This tab lets you manage the agents provided with Commence
and define and manage your own agents. You can:
 
Select the Add button to add a new agent.
Highlight an agent name in the Agent Names list box and
select one of the Edit, Copy, or Delete buttons to edit, copy,
or delete the highlighted agent.
 
The elements of this dialog box are:
AGENT NAMES LIST BOX
The Agent Names list box shows you all the agents that are
currently defined. The status of each agent is displayed to the
right of the agent name. An agent status can either be active or
inactive.
 
When an agent is highlighted, the Agent Description message
box will show a summary of the agent’s trigger, conditions, and
actions.
ADD BUTTON
To add a new agent, select the Add button. Commence displays
the New Agent dialog box.
EDIT BUTTON
To examine or edit an agent, highlight it and select the Edit
button. This brings up the details of the agent in the Edit Agent
dialog box.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the left mouse button while pointing at an
agent name in the Agents list box to edit the agent's definition
without selecting the Edit button.
COPY BUTTON
To make a copy of an existing agent and edit the copy, highlight
the agent and select the Copy button. The details of the copied
agent are displayed in the New Agent dialog box.
DELETE BUTTON
To delete an agent, highlight it in the Agents list box and select
the Delete button. Commence asks for confirmation before
deleting the highlighted agent.
OK BUTTON
Once you are finished working with agents, select the OK button
to return to the Agent tab.
Copy To File Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed by the Edit-Copy To command.
 
Type a file name into the text box and select OK. Select Cancel
to cancel the copy to file operation.
 
If the file name you supply is an existing file, Commence asks you
if you want to overwrite the file; if you select Yes, the highlighted
text is written to the file and the existing contents of the file are
lost. Select No and you are returned to this dialog box.
Paste From File Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed by the Edit-Paste From command.
The Filename text box displays the default wild card string used
to selectively list the contents of the drive or folder named in the
Save in list box. The files in this drive or folder are listed in the
box.
Change the contents of the Filename box and the drive or folder
name to examine filenames on your system. Do this by:
Typing a filename or wildcard string into the Filename text box
and pressing the ENTER key; this changes the file list in the
box.
Selecting a drive or folder name in the Save in list box; this
changes the directory whose files are listed in the box.
Once you find the filename that you want, select it from the list;
the filename is moved to the Filename box. Select OK to confirm
your selection. Select Cancel to cancel the paste from file
operation.
Select Search Categories Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Categories
button on the Global Search dialog box.
 
To use it, select and deselect categories for the search by clicking
the left mouse button over the name of a category in the list box
(or use the arrow keys and the space bar). Select OK after all of
the categories that you want to search are highlighted in the list
box.
 
The Select Search Categories dialog box contains these
elements:
SELECT ALL
Use the Select All button to highlight all of the categories in the
list.
DESELECT ALL
Use the Deselect All button to remove the highlight from all
categories.
ACTIVE CATEGORIES
Use the Active Categories button to search only the categories
that have a view open on the active desktop.
OK
Select the OK button to return to the Global Search dialog box
with the new list of categories to search.
CANCEL
Select the Cancel button to return to the Global Search dialog
box without changing the list of categories to search.
 
Note: On the first search after selecting the Global Search
command, all categories are selected by default.
Customize-Design View-Fields Tab
See Also
All views allow you to display different fields. The Report and Grid
type allows you to display any fields in the category along with
any fields from connected categories. The Book type allows you
to display up to 20 fields in the category, along with the Name
field from connected categories. The Gantt view displays the
Name field and the clarify field, and uses the date fields in the
category to display a time line. You can select any two dates in
the category to be used for the start and end of the time line. For
the Calendar view, up to five fields can be displayed. You can
select any Date and up to two time fields to be used for displaying
the items on the Calendar.
Time Conflict
This button is found on the Customize - Database - Category tab.
When you press the Time Conflict button, Commence displays
the Time Conflict Layout dialog box.
 
The Time Conflict Layout dialog box lets you:
 
-- select the fields to be used for time conflict checking for the
selected category
-- enable time conflict checking for the selected category.
-- specify a connection to use when checking for time conflicts.
 
Enabling time conflict checking for a category means that
Commence will check each item added to the category for a time
conflict with items already in the category. If a conflict is detected,
Commence asks you if you want to add the conflicting item
anyway.
 
For example, the Calendar category has time conflict enabled. If
you attempt to add more than one item occurring at the same
time on the same day, a warning message is displayed before the
new item is added. You can choose to abort or continue the
addition of the conflicting item. (Note that time slots with multiple
items display the word (multiple) instead of the item names.)
 
Selecting fields for time conflict checking will also let Commence
warn you if you specify a start time for an item that is later than
the specified end time.
Print Calendar Dialog Box
When you select the File-Print command from the menu bar with
an active calendar view, or select a Print Items agent action from
the Add/Edit Action dialog box with a calendar view selected,
Commence displays the Print Calendar dialog box.
PRINT TITLE
The Print Title text box displays the default title for printing the
view. The default title is either the title you specified using the
Customize-Design View-Display command or (if you have not
specified your own default) the name of the category used by the
view.
 
You can edit the title that appears in the Title text box to change
the title for this printing of the view only. Whether or not the title
is actually printed with the view depends on the option set using
the File-Page Setup command. The Print Title is unavailable for
the Day Planner.
STYLE
Choose the calendar style to use when printing the view by
selecting one of the radio buttons in the Style radio group. The
items printed in each style are determined by the From and To
dates (see below). This radio group is unavailable if the Detail
Only button is selected. The calendar style options are:
 
Day List
Prints three monthly calendars (previous, present, and next
months) at the top of the page, with a listing of items
underneath.
 
Day Planner
Prints the date and three months of monthly calendars at the
top of the page; with a day planner style calendar of items
underneath. You can display items for a range of 9 or 12 hours
by selecting the appropriate radio button. Select the start time
of the hour range from the list box. The start time must be
between midnight and 3:00PM.
 
Week List
Prints a week's items in a grid of 7 days per page.
 
Week Planner
Prints the week and three months of monthly calendars at the
top of the page; with the week’s items on the page under each
day of the week
 
Month Planner
Prints a month's items in a monthly calendar grid; each item is
printed in the box for the day on which it occurs.
 
6-Week Planner
Prints six weeks of items in a six-week calendar grid; each item
is printed in the box for the day on which it occurs.
 
FROM
The From text box specifies the start date for printing items from
a calendar view. Only items in the range specified by the From
and To dates are printed. Commence assumes the calendar
view's active date as the From date for Line and Day Planner
styles, and the beginning of the week or month for Week and
Month Planner styles, respectively. Commence will change the
From date accordingly as you choose different style options. You
can change this date by editing the date in the From text box.
TO
The To text box specifies the end date for printing items from a
calendar view. Only items in the range specified by the From and
To dates are printed. Commence assumes the calendar view's
active date as the To date for Line and Day Planner styles; the
end of the week or month for Week and Planner styles,
respectively. Commence will change the To date accordingly as
you choose different style options. You can change this date by
editing the date in the To text box.
OK
Select OK to return to the Print dialog box.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to cancel the print options.
Calendar Preferences Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit-
Preferences-Calendar command.
Use the Week Start Day drop down list box to select the day you
want to use as the start of a week. Wherever possible, the same
starting day will also be used to display the mini-month calendars.
Note: The Week Planner mode of the calendar uses a combined
Saturday/Sunday block and therefore cannot be displayed with a
Sunday start day.
Database Preferences Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit-
Preferences-Database command.
DATABASE PASSWORD
Turn on the Password Protect Database check box if you wish
to restrict who can access the currently open database. If
selected, Commence will prompt for a password whenever you
open this database.
To set (or change) your password, select the Set Password
button. The Change Database Password dialog box will be
displayed. For more information see Database Protection.
SET SHARED CHECKBOX BY DEFAULT
This option allows you to select whether data added to a shared
database is automatically marked as shared. If you usually add
shared data, then you should select this checkbox. If you usually
add private data, then clear the checkbox.
This option applies to the shared toolbar button on detail forms,
and to the Shared checkbox in the Add and Edit dialogs for the
definitions that can be shared in a database. This option is used
only to set the initial state of the Shared button, and you can
always override this setting by setting or clearing the Shared
button and then saving the data.
Note: If you are not authorized to update items in a category, the
Shared check box will be grayed out.
SYNCHRONIZE DATA FILES
This option allows you to select whether data files referenced by
shared items are automatically copied along with the shared
items. If this option is cleared, data files will not be copied from
this database to the server database. If this option is selected,
which is the default, data files will be copied from this database to
the server database and will be received from other client
databases.
This option can be cleared if data files referenced by shared
items are already located in a shared directory on the network.
The file name and path referenced in the shared item are
changed to reflect the path selected for the External Data Files
directory. You will need to change this directory to reflect the path
of the shared directory by selecting Edit-Preferences-Other.
This option should be selected if you do not store data files in a
shared network directory. Selecting this option will cause
Commence to copy the data files associated with shared items so
that they are available on every client database. Commence will
also automatically update the data file path to reflect the file’s
location on the client workstation, and will attempt to preserve the
filename if possible.
Note: This option must be selected at the server database to
enable clients to synchronize data files. Disabling this option
at the server will disable it for the shared database, even if
the option is selected at the client databases.
Event Logs Preferences Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit-
Preferences-Event Logs command.
LOG PHONE CALLS TO
The Log Phone Calls to group box lets you select the category
to be used as the log category when you log incoming or outgoing
phone calls. The default category is Journal, which contains
fields that will time your phone call.
 
When choosing an alternate category for the letter or phone log,
you should choose a category similar to the defaults given above
so that Commence can keep proper track of your logged phone
calls and letters.
 
For example, the default phone log has default time entries that
allow Commence to place accurate start and end times in the log,
and figure the duration of the phone call.
ADD LOG ENTRY FOR OUTGOING CALL IF...
If turn on the Phone Call is answered checkbox, Commence will
log any outgoing phone calls which were automatically dialed by
Commence, only if the phone call is answered by the other party.
If a busy signal is detected, or the phone call does not complete
properly for any reason, the call will not be logged.
 
If you need to log all phone calls, even if you do not connect with
the other party, turn on the Phone Call is not answered
checkbox. The attempted phone call will be logged, even if
Commence receives a busy signal or for some reason is unable
to complete the phone call.
LOG LETTERS TO
The Log Letters to group box lets you select the default category
to be used as the log category when you use the Tools-Send
Letter dialog boxes. The default category is Notes/History.
 
When choosing an alternate category for the letter or phone log,
you should choose a category similar to the defaults given above
so that Commence can keep proper track of your logged phone
calls and letters.
 
For example, the default letter log has a data file field that points
to the letter sent. You can view the letter directly from the item
detail of the letter log item; if you choose a category with no data
file field, you will not be able to view a letter from its letter log
item. Use the Customize-Database-Category command to look at
the definition of the default letter and phone log categories.
SAVE IN DIRECTORY
The Save in Directory section determines where Commence
saves the letters that you log. By default, this is in a subdirectory
called \letters in your Commence program directory. If you want
to change this selection, type the name of the new directory in the
Save in Directory text box. You can also use the Select button to
browse your hard disk to find a suitable directory. This displays
the Select Directory dialog box. After you choose a directory path
and select OK, the Event Logs Preferences dialog box appears
with the chosen directory shown in the Directory text box.
 
Note that the Save In Directory is not the directory where your
letter templates are stored. Commence will always store your
letter templates in the \tmplts subdirectory of your current
database.
Meeting Preferences Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit-
Preferences-Meeting command.
 
The Meeting Preferences dialog box contains nine drop-down
list boxes.
MEETING CATEGORY
Select the category for which the Schedule Meetings command
will add items. The Appointment category is the default for the
databases shipped with Commence. This is a required field.
DATE FIELD
Select a field in the Meeting Category to use for the meeting date.
Date is the default for the databases shipped with Commence.
This is a required field.
START TIME FIELD
Select a field in the Meeting Category to use for the meeting start
time. Start Time is the default in the databases shipped with
Commence. This is a required field.
END TIME FIELD
Select a field in the Meeting Category to use for the meeting end
time. End Time is the default in the databases shipped with
Commence. This is a required field.
COMMENTS FIELD
Select a field in the Meeting Category to use for the agenda,
comments, or notes for a meeting. This field is optional.
PARTICIPANTS CONNECTION
Select a connection definition to use when connecting a
Participant to the meeting. This field is optional but highly
recommended.
LOCATION CONNECTION
Select a connection definition to use when connecting the
selected Located-In item to the meeting. This field is optional.
COORDINATOR CONNECTION
Select a connection definition to use when connecting the
selected Coordinated-By item to the meeting. This field is
optional.
RESOURCES CONNECTION
Select a connection definition to use when connecting the items
selected in the Resources dialog box to the meeting. This field is
optional.
DONE
Select this button to confirm your choices for Meeting
Preferences and return to the work area.
CANCEL
Select this button to cancel the currently specified Meeting
Preferences and return to the work area without making any
changes.
Other Preferences Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit-
Preferences-Other command.
 
ITEM DETAIL
Use the Treat 'Enter' Like 'Tab' Key option to change how the
enter key operates on a detail form. If it is checked, the enter key
will move you to the next field just as the tab key does. If it is not
checked, the enter key will invoke the default button, that is, the
button with the dark line around it. The sole exception is that if
you are in a text field with more than one line, the enter key will
insert a new line character regardless of how this preference is
set.
 
If the Confirm Item Deletes option is checked, Commence will
prompt you for confirmation whenever you select Edit-Delete
Item. If not checked, Commence will delete the item from your
category without asking for confirmation.
 
If the Disable 'Save and add another' option is checked,
Commence will disable the button on the Item Detail toolbar that
opens a new blank form upon saving the current item.
 
AGENTS / OUTLOOK SYNC
The Agent options determine how Commence handles message
boxes, questions boxes, and error messages displayed by
Commence during an agent's execution.
Prompt for response to questions
Automatically answer questions (this is the default)
Automatically answer questions causes Commence to
affirmatively answer interrogative boxes with Yes or OK as a
response, whichever applies (except for message boxes
displayed by Message Box agent actions). The text of the box is
copied to the Message log so that you can tell when a
Commence agent has automatically answered questions for you.
 
The advantage of the Automatically answer questions option is
that it allows you to run agents while your PC is unattended. The
disadvantage is that it answers all questions affirmatively, and this
may not always be what you want.
 
If you turn on the Prompt for response to questions radio
button, then Commence will always prompt for an answer and will
wait for a response.
The advantage of the Prompt for response to questions option
is that it gives you the chance to respond to individual prompts
appropriately. The disadvantage is that agent message boxes will
wait an infinite amount of time for your response, and this may
mean that required processing of your data is not performed as
needed.
 
Note: The exceptions are noted below. These will always wait an
infinite amount of time for your response, and are unaffected by
the setting of this preference.
Message boxes displayed by Message Box agent actions
The message to insert another diskette when Backup runs
out of disk space
 
The option to Disable Outlook Sync Feature prevents the
unintentional use of the Outlook Synchronization feature. This
gives you the ability to pre-configure the mappings for Outlook /
Windows Mobile Calendar, Contacts, Tasks, and Notes and to
have control over when and if that feature will be accessible to
users.
 
This option is turned off by default. When the option Disable
Outlook Sync Feature is enabled, the toolbar menu command to
synchronize with Outlook becomes inactive. Agent actions
designed to auto-synchronize with Outlook are also disabled with
this option, however the agent active/inactive status remains
unchanged.
NAME FIELDS
If the Reverse "Last, First" check box is checked, whenever
Commence is printing letters or exporting it will change any name
field containing a comma to "First Last" name. If this check box is
not checked, Commence will not reverse the contents of the
name field in these situations.
SHORT DATE RANGE
Use the Short Date Range preference to control how you want
Commence to expand a two-digit year that you enter into a date
field. For example, if you enter a date such as "1/4/29" and this
option is set to the default, the years 1930-2029, Commence
assumes you mean "1/4/2029". If you changed the Short Date
Range to be 1920-2019 and re-entered "1/4/29", Commence
would expand it to "1/4/1929". Commence lets you enter dates
from January 1, 1905 to December 31, 2083.
EXTERNAL DATA FILES
When you transfer in a file from another database that has related
data files (such as logged letters), Commence needs to know
where to put the related data files on your hard disk. This is
because the directory structure on your computer and the
directory structure of the computer on which the transfer file was
created are most likely different.
 
The currently selected directory is displayed in the Directory box.
If you check the Overwrite existing file when file names
conflict option, then new files that are transferred in will be
overwritten if the filename matches one that already exists. If the
option is turned off, then files already in the directory with the
same names as incoming files are retained and the incoming files
are not added.
 
If you want to change the current data file directory, type the
name of the directory in the Directory text box, or use the Select
button to find a suitable directory. This displays the Select
Directory dialog box.
 
After you choose a directory path and select OK, the Other
Preferences dialog box appears with the chosen directory shown
in the Directory text box.
Letter Fax Macros (Word 97, WordPerfect, AmiPro)
See Also
Commence supports macros for WinFax Pro. The macros, along
with one of the word processors that works with the Commence
Letters facility, allow you to fax a letter instead of printing it.
 
These macros retrieve the selected recipient’s fax number from
Commence, select your fax printer, send the fax number to the
fax software, fax the selected letter(s), and then re-select your
default printer. The macros retrieve the fax number by looking for
a telephone number field that contains “fax” or FAX” in its name.
You can decide whether you want to print or fax on a per-letter
basis.
 
Because the macros send the fax number to the Fax software,
the fax is sent without you having to interact with the Fax
software. If you select Tools-Send Letter, letters can be created
and faxed for every item from a view in Commence. This is useful
for sending a batch of customized faxes to a group of recipients.
Batch faxes cannot be deferred to be sent at a later time.
Letter Preferences Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit-
Preferences-Letters command.
TEXT LETTERS
The section entitled Text Letters is concerned with your selection
of a word processor to use for letters created with text templates.
The default word processor is Write, but you can select any word
processor that is capable of reading in and saving flat ASCII text
files.
 
Enter the word processor in the text box to the right of Program
Filename. If the program is in your path, you can just enter the
program filename, otherwise enter the complete path. You can
also use the Select button to the right of Program Filename to
browse your PC file system to find a program.
 
Enter the file extension that your word processor uses for its
native files in the File Extension text box. When Commence
creates a text letter file (not a template file), it will use this
extension if you have requested to view the new letter in your
word processor.
Note: If you are using Ami Pro for Windows you must enter TXT
not SAM since Ami Pro will not read in a text file unless it has this
extension.)
FORMATTED LETTERS
This is used to set your preferences for formatted letter
templates. Highlight your word processor from the Word
Processor list box. Note that as you change your selection, the
entries for the fields in the Formatted Letters section change.
ALWAYS PREVIEW
This is used to set the default value for the Preview option on the
Send Letter dialog.
Open/Manage Views Dialog Box
The Open/Manage Views dialog box is displayed when you
select the View-Open/Manage Views command. Use it to open,
edit or delete a saved view or create a new one. For more
information on creating a new view, see New View Dialog Box
 
The elements of this dialog box are:
SORT BY
The radio button selected from this group determines whether the
list of views is sorted by view name, category name, or view type.
Select the radio button next to the sorting method you prefer, and
the list is re-sorted automatically.
LIST OF VIEWS
The list of all saved views is displayed in a list box; use the scroll
bar at right to scroll through the list. Highlight the name of the
view you want to display.
Shortcut: You can open a view by double-clicking the mouse on
the view name.
OPEN
Once you've highlighted the view you want to open from the view
list box, select the Open button to display the view. The saved
view is displayed and becomes the active view.
 
CREATE NEW
This button lets you add a new view for any category, using any
view type. For more information on creating a new view, see New
View Dialog Box.
EDIT
If you select the Edit button, the Edit View dialog box is
displayed. This box allows you to change the view name and
location.
DELETE
Once you've highlighted the view you want to delete from the
view list box, select the Delete button to delete the view.
DONE
Use the Done button to cancel the View-Open/Manage Views
command.
Delete View Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Delete button on
the View-Open/Manage Views tab. The message asks you to
confirm the deletion of the saved view.
 
If you select the Yes button, the selected view is deleted from
Commence.
 
Note: Deleting a view does not delete the data contained within
that view. If you delete the last view for a category, Commence
will prompt you to delete the category. You should select No,
unless you wish to delete all data and associated definitions
which may depend on this category.
Formatting a custom .HTX file for use with
Commence
You can override the default HTML templates used by
Commence. To do so, create a set of .HTX files with specific
filenames listed below and store these files in the \TMPLTS
subdirectory beneath the database directory. The templates
names are:
CALHTML.HTX This template is used when the active view type
is a Calendar. The keyword <%htmlcalendar%> found in this
template is replaced with data from the calendar view in
Commence.
 
REPTHTML.HTX This template is used when the active view type
is a Report. The keyword <%htmlview%> found in this template is
replaced with data from the report view in Commence. The data
is presented in a horizontal table format in the HTML file
regardless of the view’s layout in Commence. The items in the
view will continue to be filtered and sorted in the HTML file as
they appeared in the Commence view. The order of fields in the
report is also maintained in the HTML file. Fonts and colors used
in the view are not translated to the HTML file.
 
You may use any HTML editor to create new templates then save
the completed templates using the filenames above. Alternatively,
you may modify the built-in templates shipped with Commence.
These templates are available when you install the Customer
Relationship Management database. Open this database and
determine the path to the data directory using Help - System
Information. The templates will be located in the \TMPLTS
directory below this path. Copy the .HTX files from this directory
to the \TMPLTS directory beneath your database directory.
 
Note: The default templates listed above contain important
keywords used by Commence to merge the active view data into
the HTML file. Do not remove these keywords from the HTX files.
Save As HTML Dialog Box
The Save As HTML wizard steps you through the creation of an
HTML file containing a table of all the items in the active view.
The number of columns in the table will match the number of
fields and connections displayed in the view. The table will
automatically size itself to contain as many rows as needed to
include all items that were displayed in the view. If filters are
defined in the view, only those items that meet the filter will be
included in the table. The items will be sorted in the same order
as they appeared in the view. The resulting table will be saved in
an HTML file.
 
In the first step you will be prompted to make a choice:
Should Commence create a basic HTML document
containing the view information?
Should the active view be inserted into an existing formatted
HTML page?
 
See the corresponding sections below to determine which choice
is best for you.
By creating an HTML document containing the view
information When you select the first option the active
view is inserted into a basic HTML template provided by
Commence. Note that a very simple page is created when
using these built-in templates. You can override the default
templates used by Commence by saving a set of .HTX files
with specific filenames in the \TMPLTS directory beneath
your database directory. For additional information, see the
topic titled Formatting a custom .HTX file for use with
Commence.
 
After you select the first option and click Next>, you will be
prompted to enter some additional information about the view.
Feel free to enter values for any and all of the options below, or
you may leave them all blank.
Title: Any text you type here will appear at the top of the
HTML page. Typically, a brief description or Title of the active
view should be entered here.
Header: Any text you enter here will appear centered on the
line just above the table containing the items from the active
view.
Footer: Any text you enter here will be appear centered on
the line just below the table containing the items from the
active view.
By inserting the view information into an existing
formatted HTML page If you would prefer to use a custom
HTML template instead of the default templates included
with Commence, you may select the second option then
click Next> to continue. You will be prompted to enter the
filename of any HTML file or template of your choice. The
only requirement is that the HTML file you select must
already contain a special keyword in the position where
you want the table of data to appear. For additional
information, see the topic titled Formatting a custom .HTX
file for use with Commence. This option provides greater
flexibility by not requiring a specific .HTX template to be
used as with the first option.
Select the filename for the HTML document to be created In
the final step, you will be prompted to enter a new filename
to store the finished HTML document. You may use the
Browse button to select the directory where the file will be
stored. If you do not enter a path or change directories
then the file will be saved in the Commence program
directory. Type any filename followed by an extension of
.HTM then select the Finish button to save the file.
Select Window Dialog Box
See Also
Select a view to become the active view. This is useful when you
have many views displayed and some are hidden behind others.
 
Note that you can also use the key combination CTRL+F6 to
successively select views in the workspace as the active view.
LIST BOX
This list box displays the names of all the currently open views.
OK BUTTON
To display a view as the active view, highlight a view from the list
and select the OK button.
 
Shortcut: You can also double-click the left mouse button while
pointing at a view name in the list to activate it without selecting
the OK button.
CANCEL BUTTON
Select this button to return to the desktop without selecting a new
active view.
Customize-Design View-Display Tab
See Also
Use this command to specify a default title and paper layout for
printing a view, so that you don't need to choose one each time
you print the view. The following options can be set for all view
types:
 
PRINT TITLE
Allows you to select a default print title for the active view that will
be used unless you specify another title (or no title) at the time
you select the Print command to print the view.
 
Type (or edit if there already is a default title) a title for the active
view. The title is limited to 80 characters. Select the OK button
when you are satisfied with the title. Note that the view title will be
printed only if printing titles is specified via the Page Setup
command.
 
PAPER LAYOUT
Allows you to select a default paper layout to be used when
printing the view. If none is selected, Commence will use the
default paper layout defined with the Page Setup command.
 
The Book View is limited to the above display options. For all the
other view types, there are additional options on the display tab.
Customize-Design View-Colors Tab
See Also
Change the color code template used in the active view. Initially, a
new view's items are displayed without color coding. To use color
coding, you must first select a color code template.
 
Color coding the time bars for a calendar or Gantt chart view
allows you to add visual appeal and differentiation between
different kinds of items. For example, you may want to use red to
display meetings in a calendar view, green to display trips, and
other colors for other appointment types. Optionally, the text
entered in every field of an item can also be color coded for all
view types.
 
SELECT COLOR FOR
Select the default colors for displaying the view. You can select
colors for the item text, label text (used for field labels and the
title of the view), window background, and the color of the
highlight. Additionally, for book views, you can set the color of the
book cover.
COLOR CODING
Select a color code template from the list. If no templates are
listed, create a new one using the Customize-Database-Color
Code command.
COLOR CODE ITEM TEXT
Use this checkbox to change the color of all text for an item
based on the color code template. For example, incomplete To-
Do’s can be displayed in red text, while completed To-Do’s are
displayed in black text, making it easier to see important items at
a glance. This setting affects all fields in the item.
SHOW LEGEND
Use this checkbox to toggle the display of a legend for a calendar
or Gantt chart view. A legend explains the color coding scheme (if
any) for the view. The selected color code template is displayed in
a Legend window in the active view's window.
Customize-Design View-Fonts Tab
Use this command to select the default font used to display items
for the active view.
 
SELECT FONT FOR
Choose which element of the active view to select the font for.
You can select a font used to display the Item Text for all view
types. For calendar views, you can set the font for:
Item Text (1 column) The text used for items in Day display
mode.
Item Text (2 column) The text used for items in Week, and 2
Days display modes.
Item Text (7 column) The text used for items in Month, and 6
Weeks display modes.
Label Text The title bar text showing the date.
Mini-month Text The numbers and text on the small month
calendars in Day display mode.
 
Type a font name and font size in the Font Name and Font Size
text boxes, or select from the associated drop-down list boxes.
The valid font names and sizes in the list box reflect the fonts you
have installed in Windows. You can also change the font style to
Bold, Italic, and/or Underline by selecting the appropriate check
boxes. The Font Appearance box shows you what the selected
font and style look like.
 
CHANGE ALL
This button will change the font for every field and element in the
view.
 
Shortcut: If you would like to select the same font for every field
(or most of the fields) in the active view, use this button to quickly
change the font for all fields in one step. Then, if desired, use
Customize-Design View-Fields to selectively change the font for
some of the fields.
 
OK
Select OK once you've made your selections.
Filter/Sort Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Customize-Sort
View command or the Customize-Design View command while a
report viewer is the active view.
 
The items in the report viewer can be filtered as with any other
Commence view. Setting a filter will determine which items are
displayed in the finished report. Likewise, setting the sort order
will affect the order in which those items appear in the finished
report.
 
To filter and/or sort the items in the Report Viewer:
1. After selecting Customize -> Design View, click the
Filter/Sort tab.
2. Press the Filter button on this screen if you wish to define a
filter. The standard Filter dialog will appear.
3. Press the Sort button on the Filter/Sort screen to apply a
sort to the items in the Report Viewer.
4. A modified version of the Sort Fields dialog for the Report
Viewer will appear.
5. From here, select what fields are to be used for the sort and
whether the sort on the field is to be in Ascending (A - Z) or
Descending (Z - A) order.
6. When you have finished your changes, you may click OK to
save your changes and close the window.
 
Note: Group Headers and Group Totals are managed from the
Report Designer. These options cannot be set using the Sort
dialog within Commence.
Design Dialog Box(Report Viewer)
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Customize-
Design View command while a report viewer is the active view.
 
Press the Launch Designer button on the Design Tab to begin
customizing the report layout.
 
The Commence Report Designer is used to customize the report
layout for the Report Viewer.
1. 
The report viewer window should be the active window.
2. 
After selecting Customize -> Design View, click the Design
tab.
3. 
Click the Launch Designer... button to open the Report
Designer window.
4. 
The fields you selected in the report viewer will be listed in
the Fields toolbox.
Note: Each field in this list has been bound to a text box,
also known as a control, within the Report Designer. As
you customize the properties for each field, you are
actually setting the properties for the control that the field
has been bound to.
5. 
Use drag and drop to move each field into the report
layout. Fields can be positioned anywhere in the Header,
Body, or Footer of the report. When you drop the field into
the report, it will be displayed as a box and the field label
will be changed to ’txtFieldname’ or ’Field1’ indicating that
this field is now a text or field control.
Tip To add multiple copies of the same field to the report,
you can hold the CTRL key on your keyboard while
dragging and dropping the field from the Fields toolbox to
the report.
6. 
Each field can be resized to accommodate the amount of
data expected for each field. To resize a field, click on the
edge of the control for that field until handles appear on
each side. A handle can be dragged in two directions to
increase or decrease the field width and height as needed.
7. 
Additional controls, such as labels, lines and images can
be added to the report.
Filter Tab
See Also
The Customize-Filter View command displays a Summary tab of
all filters selected for the active view. If a simple filter is already
defined for this view, its definition is displayed as Filter #1. You
can reverse the sense of your filter (i.e., select all items that do
not match the filter) by turning on the Except check box.
 
To select or change one of these filters, select the tab (Filter #)
for the filter you want. As you add more filters, you can use logical
operations to relate the filters to each other using the And and Or
radio buttons.
 
The And radio button lets you chain up to eight filters together.
For example, you can say you want only items that have both
Filter #1 and Filter #2 to be true.
 
The Or radio button lets you filter on mutually exclusive
conditions. For example, you can say you want only the items
that have either Filter #1 or Filter #2 to be true.
 
You can also use a mix of And's and Or's. When you do this, you
should pay attention to the grouping boxes on the Summary tab.
For example, there is one group box around filters #1 and #2 and
another group box around filters #3 and #4. The And/Or is applied
within the group boxes first and then the And/Or is applied
between the group boxes.
Sort Fields Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Customize-Sort
View command.
 
For each sort field, there is a drop-down list box for the field name
and a radio group for the sort type. The drop-down list boxes
contain a list of all the fields and connections in the view.
 
To choose a field for a sort field, select the down arrow on the
right side of the appropriate list box (Primary Field, Secondary
Field, Third Field, Fourth Field) and select one of the fields
displayed. The default primary sort field is set to the Name field
for that category.
 
To clear a sort, select the down arrow on the right side of the
appropriate list box (Primary Field, Secondary Field, Third Field,
Fourth Field) and select (none) from the top of the list. To clear all
sorts at once, press the Clear Sort button. This resets the
primary sort back to the Name field.
 
To change the sort type, select either the ascending or
descending radio button that corresponds to the sort type you
want for that field. Ascending sorts the field in a forward direction
from the lowest field value to the highest, while descending sorts
backwards. For more details, see the topic titled Sort Order.
 
Shortcut: In report and grid views, the primary sort field is
indicated by a solid underline under the field label of the sort field
(if displayed). The secondary sort field is indicated by a dotted
underline under the field label of the sort field (if that field is
displayed in the view). You can change the primary and
secondary sort fields by following the steps below, instantly
affecting the sort order of the view.
Left click on field label
sets primary sort,
ascending
shift + left click on field
label
sets primary sort,
descending
ctrl + left click on field
label
sets secondary sort,
ascending
shift + ctrl + left click on
field label
sets secondary sort,
descending
 
If you choose a connection field as a sort field in a report or grid
view, the view sorts (alphanumerically) on the name field of the
first connected item, regardless of the actual connected field
selected. If a connection field is chosen as the primary or
secondary sort field, the solid or dotted underline indicator is
placed under the field label for the connection.
 
If you choose a connection definition name as a sort field in a
Gantt chart view, the Gantt chart sorts (alphanumerically) on the
name field of the first item linked on that connection definition.
 
 
See Customize-Design View-Fields Tab for how to include
connection fields in a view.
Customize-Database-Category
See Also
Summary of the commands on the Category tab:
 
Add: Add a new category.
Edit: Edit the definition of the selected category. The category
definition includes:
-- category name
-- field definitions; each field has:
-- field type
-- field name
-- field size
-- allow items with duplicate name fields (toggle)
-- clarify field for duplicate item Names
Copy: Add a new category by copying the definition of the
selected category.
Delete: Delete the selected category.
Time Conflict: Enable/disable event time conflict checking for
the selected category and select fields to be used
for time conflict checking.
Customize-Database-Color Code
See Also
Selecting Customize-Database-Color Code from the menu bar
displays the Color Code tab.
 
Use this command to add, edit, and delete color code templates.
Color code templates specify the colors used to accent entries in
views.
 
In a calendar, the color code is used in the background area
behind the item description. In standard report views and grid
views, the color code is used as the text foreground color. In
general, items can be color coded according to the value of a
check box field, selection field, or a connection in each item.
 
For example, in the default Calendar view, the color code
template is based on the Type of Calendar item. If you turn on the
Show Legend checkbox, a legend is displayed that explains the
color code template in use. The color code template used by the
Calendar view in the Tutorial Database is the Appointment Type
template.
 
Color code templates are associated with a particular category
and can be used by any view in that category.
 
You can define as many color coding templates for a category as
you like, up to the maximum allowed per database.
Customize-Database-Connection
A connection is a bi-directional link between two categories (or a
category and itself). Use the Customize-Database-Connection
command to add, edit, and delete connections between any two
categories, or between a category and itself.
 
Once you establish a connection, you can link items from the
categories participating in the connection together to create
relationships among your data, and reduce the amount of
redundant data in your database.
 
Selecting the Customize-Database-Connection command
displays the Connection dialog box, which lists the names of the
connections from the active category to other categories. The
Add, Edit, and Delete buttons in this dialog box allow you to
manage the connections between the categories in the active
database.
SEE ALSO:
Connections Overview A discussion of the basics of connections
and connecting items together.
Connecting an Item to Another Item Detailed instructions on using
connection controls on item details.
Customize-Database-Detail Form Describes detail forms and how
to change their layouts (content,
appearance, and arrangement of fields).
Customize-Database-Detail Form A detail form is
used to enter data into a category. Detail forms are
also used to view particular items in a category.
Many different detail forms may be defined for each
category, making it possible for very specific forms
to be developed to meet various requirements.
 
The Customize-Database-Detail Form command displays the
Detail Form dialog box. Use this command to customize how an
item detail is displayed using a particular detail form. You can:
select which fields are displayed on a form
change the arrangement of fields
select different text and background colors
select different font styles
add new detail forms
create VBScripts for forms
 
If you want to arrange the fields on an open item detail, however,
we recommend you use the Customize-Design View command
(or the design button 
image/design_shg.gif
on the tool bar) instead of this command. This will avoid having to
save all the open item details before rearranging the fields. For
example, if you are editing or adding an item for the Calendar
category, and you don't like the arrangement of fields on the item
detail form, select Customize-Design View instead of this
command; the Customize-Database-Detail Form command
requires that you close any open item details that use a detail
form before editing the detail form.
Import/Export Dialog Box
Use the Import/Export dialog box to manage your import/export
templates. An import/export template stores the name of the
Commence category to use, how to read the external file, how the
fields in the external file correspond with the fields in your
category, and how Commence should update your category.
 
Commence is delivered with an import/export template for each
category. Use the Edit button as described below to examine the
template definitions.
 
Unless your external file is self-describing (that is, one with a
sample file), you will need to know how the external file is
formatted, including the order of the fields.
 
Note: There are some special measures that you must take when
you import connections from an external file. See Importing
Connections.
ADD BUTTON
When you select the Add button, Commence displays the
Template Definition dialog box.
EDIT BUTTON
Select the Edit command to view or edit the import/export
template highlighted in the Import/Export Templates list box.
Commence displays the Template Definition dialog box filled in
with the details of the template.
 
You cannot change the category name or the file format for a
template.
COPY BUTTON
Select the Copy command to make a copy of the highlighted
template in the Import/Export Templates list box. The category
selection, field mapping, import rules, and export rules (if
applicable) will all be identical to the original template. You must,
however, enter a unique Template Name to identify the newly
copied template.
DELETE BUTTON
To delete an import/export template that you do not expect to use
in the future, highlight the template name in the Import/Export
Templates list box and select the Delete command. Commence
displays a confirmation message before deleting the template.
 
Select Yes to delete the template, No to cancel the deletion.
CLOSE BUTTON
Select CLOSE to return to the work area.
Database Options Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Customize-
Workgroup command, then press the Next > button once to get to
this screen.
DEFAULT PERMISSIONS...
Use this command to set the default user level and category
permissions for the active shared database. Pressing this button
displays the Authorization Defaults dialog box.
ASSIGN USERS...
Use this command to match up the Login ID’s of Commence
users in your workgroup with items in the Person category (or
similar category). The names of all users should be entered into
the Commence Person category before you can perform this
step. This information will be used for selective permissions to
determine which users should receive which items. Pressing this
button displays the Assign Users to Commence Items dialog box.
SELECT CONNECTIONS...
Use this command to configure which connections (between each
shared category and the Person category) to use for selective
permissions. Pressing this button displays the Select Connections
for Selective Permissions dialog box.
REQUIRE USERS TO LOGIN TO THE SHARED DATABASE
Turn on the Require Users to Login... check box if you wish to
restrict who can access the currently open database. If selected,
Commence will prompt for a login name and password whenever
you open this database.
Initially, you can set the passwords for all your users. Start
ComAdmin, then select the Users icon (or select File-Users from
the menu). Select the user’s name and press Edit to change or
remove the password. Each user can then personalize that
password from Commence, after they have logged in for the first
time, by selecting Edit-Preferences-Database.
BACK
Use the Back button to go back to the previous dialog box.
NEXT
Use the Next button to advance to the next dialog box.
FINISH
Select the Finish button to close the Customize Workgroup
dialog box. This will save whatever changes you may have
made, or cancel if no changes were made.
Permissions Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Customize-
Workgroup command, then press the Next > button twice to get
to this screen.
SET PERMISSIONS FOR...
You may set permissions for clients to this shared database by
selecting one or more user name(s) from the list box.
SELECT ALL/DE-SELECT ALL
Pressing the Select All button selects all the user names from
the list, allowing you to set permissions globally for all users at
once. To undo your selection, press the same button, which will
now be labeled Deselect All.
EDIT PERMISSIONS...
After selecting the user names, categories, or desktops, press
this button to change the permission from the current values
shown. Pressing this button displays the Edit Authorizations
dialog box.
BACK
Use the Back button to go back to the previous dialog box.
NEXT
Use the Next button to advance to the next dialog box.
FINISH
Select the Finish button to close the Customize Workgroup
dialog box. This will save whatever changes you may have
made, or cancel if no changes were made.
Communications Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Customize-
Workgroup command, then press the Next > button until you get
to this screen. For more detailed instructions, see:
 Configuring Server and Client Communications
CONFIGURE...
This button in the Server Communications group box is used to
configure the communication parameters for the Server. If any
clients will be syncing via E-Mail, the parameters entered would
include the Server’s E-Mail Login Name and password. If any
clients will be syncing via a shared LAN directory, the only
parameter you need to specify is which directory the server will
use for storing updates for the active shared database. Pressing
this button displays the Workgroup Communications dialog box.
CONFIGURE...
This button in the Client Communications group box is used to
select the preferred method of syncing for each of your clients.
Select one client at a time from the list and press the Configure
button to display the Workgroup Communications dialog box.
BACK
Use the Back button to go back to the previous dialog box.
NEXT
Use the Next button to advance to the next dialog box.
FINISH
Select the Finish button to close the Customize Workgroup
dialog box. This will save whatever changes you may have
made, or cancel if no changes were made.
Register Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Customize-
Workgroup command, then press the Next > button until you get
to the Register screen. For more detailed step-by-step
instructions see:
How to register Clients
ALL USERS
In the list of all users, select a user who is not yet registered to
the shared database. Pressing the Register button adds the
selected user’s name to the list of registered users who have
access to the shared database. Note: Access rights (Read-Write-
Delete) should be configured using the Permissions screen
before the user is registered.
REGISTER
Use this command to add the selected user’s name to the
list of registered users.
Each user can only be registered once; if the user you
select is already registered, the Register button will be
grayed out.
REGISTERED USERS
Select the name of a registered user from this list, then press
either the Details button or the Remove button. See the
description of each button below for more information.
DETAILS
Use this command to see the user’s authorization key, or to
create an instruction sheet for that user. Pressing this button
displays the Registered User dialog box.
REMOVE
Use this command to remove (i.e. un-register) a user from
the workgroup. A confirmation message will be displayed
before the user is permanently removed. This frees up that
user’s license to be used by another user. This also notifies
the server to perform the necessary cleanup.
BACK
Use the Back button to go back to the previous dialog box.
NEXT
Use the Next button to advance to the next dialog box.
FINISH
Select the Finish button to close the Customize Workgroup
dialog box. This will save whatever changes you may have
made, or cancel if no changes were made.
Enroll Client Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Customize-
Workgroup command at a user’s workstation from a database
that has not yet enrolled to the shared database.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to return to the work area without enrolling in a
shared database.
BACK
The Back button will be grayed out on this screen. Use the
Cancel button to go back to the work area.
NEXT
Select the Next button to continue with the enroll process.
FINISH
The Finish button will be grayed out until all the enroll dialog
boxes are filled in properly.
Spell Checker Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed by the Tools-Spell Check command
when it finds a misspelled word in a text field on an item detail.
 
As the spell checker finds a spelling it does not recognize, it
displays a portion of the text containing the unrecognized spelling
and highlights it.
 
The Spell Checker dialog box gives you three buttons for
accepting the spelling of the currently highlighted word as correct,
one that allows you to manually edit the word or ask the spell
checker for suggested spellings, and a Done button to leave the
spell checker. Once all misspelled words have been accepted or
replaced, only the Done button remains selectable.
HERE
To accept only the currently highlighted occurrence of a word's
spelling within the field being checked, select the Here button
from the Accept group box. Commence then highlights the next
misspelled word in the field (if any).
EVERYWHERE
To accept all occurrences of a word's spelling within the field
being checked, select the Everywhere button from the Accept
group box. Commence then highlights the next misspelled word in
the field (if any).
PERMANENTLY
To place the current spelling of a word into your personal
dictionary and accept all occurrences of a word's spelling within
the field being checked, select the Permanently button from the
Accept group box. This lets you add words, such as jargon or
acronyms, common to your business or profession, so that the
spell checker won't flag them as misspellings. Commence then
highlights the next misspelled word in the field (if any).
SUGGESTIONS
Select the Suggestions button to manually edit the misspelled
word or get spelling suggestions from the spell checker. Selecting
this button displays the Type a Correction or Select a Suggestion
dialog box.
DONE
Select the Done button when you are finished checking the
spelling of words.
Schedule Meeting Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Tools-Schedule
Meeting command.
 
The description of this dialog box is based on the Meeting
Preferences set in Commence's pre-defined categories. If (Use
Outlook) has been selected using the Edit-Preferences-Meeting
menu command, the Schedule Meeting command will launch the
Microsoft Outlook Meeting Scheduler. Refer to the Microsoft
Outlook online help for additional information about using the
Microsoft Outlook Meeting Scheduler.
 
The Schedule Meeting dialog box contains these elements:
NAME
Type in a descriptive name for the appointment or calendar to-do.
The name can be up to 35 characters. This field is required.
LOCATED IN
This list box contains the names of items from a location
category. Select one item as the location for the meeting. This
field is optional.
PARTICIPANTS AND NON-PARTICIPANTS
These list boxes contain item names from the Person/Company
category. The boxes are used to build a list of participants for the
meeting as described below. If you select Find Time, the
appointment category of the selected Participants is checked for
availability. See Find Time dialog box. If you select Save, the
saved appointment is connected to these selected Participants.
 
To select Participants, highlight one or more people from the non-
participants list box and select either the Required or Optional
button to move them to the Participants list box. Required
participants have check marks in front of their names in the list
box. If you have a User Item selected, your name will already be
selected as a "Required" participant.
 
To remove participants from the meeting, highlight a name from
the Participants list box and select the Remove button.
 
To highlight multiple individual items in either of the Participants
list boxes, press and hold down the Ctrl key as you click the
mouse button over them. To highlight a range of items in either of
the Participants list boxes, highlight the first item in the range,
move the list box using the scroll bars (if necessary) to display
the item at the other end of the range, then press and hold down
the Shift key as you click the mouse button over the last item in
the range.
Shortcut: To add a single optional participant, double click the
mouse button over the name of a participant in the list box at
right. To remove a single optional or required participant, double
click the mouse button over the name of a participant in the list
box at left.
FIND TIME
Select this button to find an available appointment date and time
for the selected Participants. For more information, see Find
Time dialog box.
DATE
Type in a date for the meeting. If present, it is used as the starting
date for Find Time. This field is optional and defaults to today's
date.
START TIME
Type in a start time for the meeting. This field is optional if you
are using the Find Time feature or saving a Day Title.
END TIME
Type in an end time for the meeting. This field is optional if you
are using the Find Time feature or saving a Day Title. If you save
this information with a Start Time but a blank End Time,
Commence automatically sets your End Time to equal your Start
Time.
COMMENTS
Type in an agenda, notes, or comments for the meeting.
COORDINATED BY
This box lets you select the name of the person responsible for
the meeting. When you select Save, this person will be
connected to your appointment item. This person's appointments
are not checked for availability.
RESOURCES
Select this button to choose resources such as a viewgraph
projector or speaker phone needed for your meeting. See the
Resources dialog box for more information. When you select
Save from the Schedule Meeting dialog box, any resources you
selected are automatically connected to the appointment.
SAVE
Select this button to add your new item and its connections to
your calendar category.
CANCEL
Select this button to close the Schedule Meeting dialog box
without adding an item to your calendar category.
Select File Dialog Box
This dialog box appears when a command or operation requires a
file name. The Select File dialog box lets you search through the
available disks on your system for an appropriate file.
FILE NAME
Type a file name in the File Name text box or select a name from
the File Name list box. This box lists all the files with the
extension selected in the List Files Of Type box. If the file you
want has an extension other than the one selected by
Commence, or you want to search for other files, type an asterisk
(*), a period, and an extension (example: .txt), then choose OK to
see a list of files (from the current directory) with that extension in
the File Name list box. To see files with more than one extension,
type a semicolon (;), a second asterik (*), a period, and another
extension. For example if you wnat to see all the files with the
.XFR and .TFR extensions, type *.XFR;*.TFR.
 
FILES OF TYPE
Select the type of file you want to see in the File Name list box.
Backup
Commence puts an initial file name into the Filename text box
that is the name of the database directory whose contents you
are trying to backup plus the .xfr extension. You can change the
file name to anything you want.
Restore
Commence puts the string *.xfr into the Filename text box so
that, by default, only filenames with the .xfr extension are listed in
the Files list box. If your backup file has a different extension,
replace xfr in the Filename list box so your file will be listed. (See
Open/Manage Database for an explanation of backup and
restore.)
Import/Export
Commence will select a default file extension for the Filename
edit box based on the file format specified in your selected
import/export template. The default file extensions are shown
below. (See File-Import for an explanation of import/export
templates.)
 
ASCII *.txt
dBASE *.dbf
DIF *.dif
 
The DOS Text checkbox allows you to translate between the
Windows standard character set and the DOS character set. If
you are sharing information between Commence and other
Windows applications, leave this box unchecked. If you are
sharing infomation between Commence and other applications
that run in DOS but are not designed specifically for Windows,
you should check this box.
 
For an Export operation, an Archive check box also is displayed.
 
Caution: If you turn on the Archive check box, all items in the
exported category will be deleted from your database. Use this
option only to archive and delete items you no longer need in
your database.
Transfer
Commence puts the default extension for transfer files, the string
*.tfr, into the Filename text box so that, by default, only filenames
with the .tfr extension are listed in the Files list box.
Sync Link
Commence puts the default extension for update files, the string
*.snc, into the Filename text box so that, by default, only
filenames with the .snc extension are listed in the Files list box.
Directories
Select the directory from the Directories list box.
Drives
Select the drive that contains the file you want to select.
 
 
Once the file name you want appears in the File Name text box,
select OK to confirm your choice.
 
Shortcut: You can double-click the mouse on a file name in the
File Name list box, or on a drive in the Drives list box or directory
name in the Directories list box to select them.
 
Choose Cancel to cancel the select file operation.
Sync Out Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box is displayed by the Tools-Sync Link Out
command.
 
In this dialog box, you can define and maintain a set of two or
more identical databases (called a sync link group). You can also
manage this sync link group by adding, editing, and deleting
remote databases. Once you establish a sync link group you can
compress a Commence database into a single file (called an
update file) to sync link the database changes from one PC to the
other as you move between them. When you choose the
database to synchronize and select OK, the sync out begins.
SYNCHRONIZE WITH DATABASE
Use the Synchronize with Database drop-down list box to
select the name of the remote database for which you are
creating an update file. Database names are added to this list
when you select the Add button. See the heading Adding A
Remote Database below.
SYNC FILENAME
Use the Sync filename text box to enter (or use the Select
button to choose) a filename to hold the updates for the selected
remote database. The update file is the input file for a Tools-Sync
Link In command.
DEFINE REMOTE DATABASE
The buttons in the Define Remote Database group box allow
you to Add, Edit, and Delete remote database names from the
base database of a sync link group only. These buttons are
unavailable on a remote database in a sync link group. See the
headings Adding/Editing/Deleting A Remote Database below.
SYNC TYPE
This radio group is used to specify the amount of information in
the update file. Select Incremental for an "incremental update"
which consists of only the information which has been updated
since the previous update file was created. This is the default
setting. Select Complete for a "complete update" which consists
of all definitions and data in the open database.
OK
Select OK to begin creation of the update file for the selected
database.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to return to the work area.
Creating An Update File
To create a update file, first select the database you want to
synchronize with from the Synchronize with Database drop-
down list box and then select Incremental or Complete from the
Sync Type radio group. The name of the update file will appear
in the Sync Filename text box. If you want to change the
filename, type it in or use the Select button to choose an update
file name. Once you select OK the sync out begins.
Adding A Remote Database
To add a new database to a sync link group, select the Add
button. This displays the Add Remote Database dialog box.
Make sure that the base database is the last database in which
you did a Tools-Sync Link In command.
Caution: If your base database does not have the most
recent updates to the sync link group's data and you
initialize your new remote database, your sync link
group will now have inconsistent copies of the
database. This means that your sync link group will
no longer be synchronized and you may lose data.
Note: After adding a new remote database you will need to create
an initial update file for the database. See Creating the Initial
Update File for a description of this process.
Editing A Remote Database
Selecting the Edit button from the Sync Out dialog box lets you
change the name of the currently selected remote database. This
displays the Edit Remote Database dialog box.
Deleting A Remote Database
Selecting this button displays a message box that asks for
confirmation before deleting the database name currently
displayed. Select Yes to delete the indicated database name.
Select No to cancel.
Caution: You can always re-add a deleted database name, but
you will have to create an initial update file for the
database (see the instructions given above under
Adding a Remote Database). This means that you
must start over with an empty remote database. The
database formerly used as the remote under the
deleted name cannot be used again as a remote
database.
Transfer Rules Dialog Box
This dialog box may be displayed after you select OK on the
Select Transfer File dialog box. It appears automatically when
Commence detects data (i.e., items) in a transfer file. To use the
box, choose appropriate options and select OK to begin the
transfer.
TRANSFER IN ITEMS
This check box is on by default and if it is left on the items
contained in the transfer file will also be transferred. If this check
box is turned off, the other choices in this dialog box are
disabled, and no items are transferred into the database.
NEW ITEMS
This radio group tells Commence how to insert items with new
names into your category. Select the Add radio button to
automatically add each item with a new name into the category.
Select the Ask before adding radio button to have Commence
prompt you for confirmation before adding each new item.
EXISTING ITEMS
This radio group tells Commence how to handle incoming items
that have the same name as one or more existing items in the
category. How you want to handle these items will depend in part
on whether the category allows duplicates. The radio button
choices in this group are described in the Existing Item Rules
section, below.
OK
Select OK to confirm the selected transfer rules and begin
importing items from the transfer file.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to terminate the transfer of items. Any definitions
already transferred from the transfer file remain in the open
database.
Existing Item Rules
The selected rule in the Existing Items radio group determines
what happens when there is a conflict between the name of an
existing item and an item (or items) being transferred into the
open database.
 
In the explanations below, the "name" of an item includes the
contents of the name field and the clarify field for the category (if
one is defined). Items with the identical name values but with
different clarify field values are not considered duplicates.
 
Replace duplicates, all fields
Delete each item in the target category with the same name as
that of an incoming item, and replace it with the data item from
the transfer file.
Replace duplicates, incoming fields only
For duplicate items, replace only the field values being
transferred in. Other field values in the existing item remain
unchanged.
Ask on duplicates, then replace all fields
Operates the same way as Replace duplicates, all fields
(above), except that for each duplicate item found, displays a
message box showing the item name and asks if the item should
be replaced (OK) or skipped (Cancel).
Ask on duplicates, then replace incoming fields only
Operates the same way as Replace duplicates, incoming
fields only (above), except that for each duplicate item found,
displays a message box showing the item name and asks if the
fields in the item should be replaced (OK) or skipped (Cancel).
Add duplicates as new item
If the category allows duplicates, items with the same names as
existing items will simply be added to the category.
Skip duplicates
Ignore an incoming item that has the same name as an existing
item.
Transferring In Objects with Duplicate Names
During the transfer in, whenever Commence detects an object
(category, view, etc.) in the transfer file that has the same name
as an existing object of the same type in the target database,
Commence uses the existing definition rather than the one in the
transfer file.
 
For example, let's say that you have a Project category in your
database that has four fields defined. You transfer in from a file
that has a Project category with the same four fields as the
existing category, plus another field. Commence will skip over
the extra field in the transfer file and add only the items from the
file. As it adds items, any fields in the incoming data that are not
defined in the existing category are not transferred. In our
example, the fifth field from the transfer file's Project category is
not transferred into the target database.
 
If you want to replace the Project category with the category from
the transfer file, then you will have to first change the name of
the existing Project category (using Customize-Database-
Category) and then start the transfer.
 
Note: Transfer cannot be used to update field definitions or to
merge categories with the same name but different field
definitions. If the category in the target database is modified to
match the category being transferred in, only then will all items
and fields in the transfer file successfully merge with the target
database. Use the Sync Link Out command to make changes to
categories and fields in a target database.
Transfer Out Options Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box is displayed by the Tools-Transfer Out command.
 
To create a transfer file, first select Category or View from the
Transfer by group box. Then select the categories or views you
want to transfer from the multi-select list box on the left, and any
agents you want to transfer from the Transfer Agents multi-
select list box on the right. If you want to transfer items and
related data files (DOS files pointed to by data file fields), turn on
the appropriate check box(es). Select OK and then select a
transfer file name. Once you choose a file name, the transfer out
begins.
TRANSFER BY
Select the Category or View button to display a list of categories
or views in the list box on the left of the dialog box. You may
select multiple categories or views from the list by clicking the
left mouse button over them (see Keyboard Commands for how
to do this using the keyboard).
 
Dependent definitions and data are included in the transfer file
automatically.
TRANSFER AGENTS
Select the agents you want to transfer from this list box. You may
select multiple agents from the list. Dependent definitions and
data are included in the transfer file automatically.
SELECT ALL
These buttons allow you to highlight all of the entries in the list
directly above the button selected.
ALSO TRANSFER
Turn on the Items check box to transfer out all items in the
selected categories or views. If you turn on the Items check box,
you may also turn on the Related Data Files check box to
transfer out all files referenced by data file fields in the
transferred items. See External Data Files group box in the
Edit-Preferences-Other dialog box for more information on where
data files are stored when transferred into a database.
OK
Select this button to confirm your transfer option choices and
select a transfer file name. This displays the Select Transfer File
dialog box
CANCEL
Select this button to cancel the Transfer Out command.
 
Note: If you want to transfer only items, use the Export-By
Category command or the Export-By View command to create a
DOS file and use the Import command to read the file into a
database.
.
Export Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed by the File-Export-By Category and
File-Export-By View commands.
 
Use the Export dialog box to tell Commence which template to
use when you want to export data. An import/export template
stores the name of the Commence category to be exported, what
data format to use when writing the external file, and which fields
in your category you want to export.
 
The same templates and dialog boxes are used for importing and
exporting; the only major difference between import and export is
the direction of the transfer.
 
Note that there are special considerations concerning importing
connection definition data from an export file. See Importing
Connections.
EXPORT BUTTON
Before selecting the Export button on the Export dialog box,
highlight the name of the import/export template you want to use.
When you select the Export button, Commence displays the
Select Export File dialog box.
 
Commence displays a message box as the export progresses.
You can select Cancel to stop the export operation, in which
case nothing is written to disk.
CANCEL BUTTON
Select CANCEL to discontinue the export process and return to
the work area.
Basic Concepts
If you are learning Commence concepts for the first time, you
should read this section.
 
This Basic Concepts section is divided into the following topics:
Categories
Views and View Types
Connections
Agents
Databases
Drag and Drop Operations
Finding Items in a List with Prefix Matching
Natural Language Dates and Times
Installing the Server Software
The first step to be done when establishing a Commence
Workgroup is to install the Server Software. Any PC connected to
a Local Area Network (LAN) or the Internet can be used as the
Commence Server. Since the Server is the hub for all data
changes within the Workgroup, it is recommended that a
dedicated PC be used for the Commence Server, especially if
there will be many Clients. For a small workgroup, the Server can
run on the same PC as a Commence Client. The Commence
Server must be installed from the PC that will run the Server
software.
Perform the following procedure to install Commence Workgroup.
The same procedure is used whether installing Commence for the
first time or re–installing Commence.
NOTE: If working with a previous installation of Commence, a
new copy of Commence can be installed over the previous
installation, or it can be installed in a new location, resulting in
two different versions of Commence residing on the same
machine.
 
1. Insert the Commence CD into the computer’s CD ROM drive.
2. If autorun is enabled the CD will run automatically.
Otherwise, select the Run command from the Start menu on
the Windows task bar.
3. Type d:\setup.exe then click OK. This example assumes d:\
is the drive letter that refers to the CD ROM drive. Click the
Browse button if you are unsure of which driver letter to use.
4. An introductory screen will appear. You may click Continue
to proceed or wait for the menu to appear.
5. Click Install to select which software to install. Select
Commence RM Workgroup to begin the server installation.
6. The Software License agreement will be displayed. If you
agree to abide by the terms of the license agreement click
Yes to continue. Clicking No will cancel the setup operation.
7. You will be prompted to enter your user information. You
must enter a valid Commence RM license number in the box
labeled Serial number. Click Next after all the information is
entered correctly. Then click Yes to confirm your registration
information.
8. Select Next. Follow the instructions on the screen and enter
the requested information. If additional assistance is required
select the Help button provided on the installation screens.
 
When the installation is complete, you will be prompted to run
the license administration program (license.exe). You should
select Yes to do so. This will allow you to set the user limit
for the number of clients that will be accessing the shared
database. You will also need to activate the software before
it can be used.
License Administration
Once the Commence Server has been installed, you will need to
run the license administration software. Sales will provide you
with a license upgrade key that indicates the number of clients
you can enroll to a shared database in Commence.
To administer licenses:
1. Select the Run command from the Start menu on the
Windows task bar.
2. Click Browse to locate the LICENSE.EXE program. This file
can be found in the \ADMIN subdirectory under the
Commence program directory. This is the same directory as
ComAdmin.
3. The License Administration Program will automatically fill in
your user information (Name, Company Name, Serial No.)
from the Commence installation.
4. In the Authorization Key: field, enter the key you received
from Commence Sales.
5. Select OK.
This will set your user limit in ComAdmin allowing you to add
the correct number of users.
Adding Users to the Commence Workgroup
After adding the client licenses, you will need to add users for
your workgroup.
Note The “admin” Login ID identifies the special user that has
permission to make all changes to the Commence
workgroup in order to set it up, maintain users, and maintain
shared databases. The “admin” Login ID is automatically
added to your Commence workgroup during installation and
does not have a password by default.
To add users:
1. Start ComAdmin from the Windows Program Manager or
Start Menu. Note: The only Login ID that can add users is
the “admin” ID.
2. Select the Users button.
3. For each user you want to add, select the Add button.
4. Enter the settings for the user, including their full name, their
Commence login ID, and a password. Note that a password
is not required and may be left blank.
Note: The login ID is the name that is entered when logging into a
Commence shared database. This is typically the user’s
initials, first name, last name, or a combination of the above.
It is recommended that each user’s login ID be set to the
same ID they use for logging into the network in order to
make it easier to remember.
5. When complete, select Save.
Note You must have a license for each user. Additional licenses
can be purchased from your dealer or Commence
Corporation. If a user needs to have more than one client
database, for example one at work and one on their laptop,
they can use Sync Link. For more information see, Using
Sync Link in your Workgroup in the Server Guide
(svrguide.pdf).
Note Each Commence Server has a limit on the number of clients
that it can service. This limit can be displayed by opening
the About dialog box in ComAdmin with the Help-About
menu command. You can only add as many client licenses
and users as this limit allows and can upgrade the
Commence Server Edition to handle more clients as
necessary. Contact your distributor for information on
increasing the number of clients allowed by the Commence
Server.
Setting Up a Shared Database
The basis for any Commence Workgroup is a Shared Database,
which is defined using ComAdmin. Whether creating a new
database from scratch, or converting an existing stand–alone
database to a Shared Database, the database will need to be
added via ComAdmin.
Perform the following procedure to add a Shared Database:
To add a shared database:
1. Start ComAdmin from the Windows Program Manager or
Start Menu. Note: The only Login ID that can add shared
databases is the “admin” ID. By default, this user has no
Password. You can change the password after you login for
the first time.
2. In ComAdmin, select the Databases button. You will be
presented with a dialog box that shows the defined shared
databases.
3. Select the Add button.
4. Enter a Name and Description for the new shared
database.
5. In the Database Location box, enter the path of the
database that will become the shared database. This can
either be the path of an existing database that you want to
be shared or an empty, new database.
Note: This is the database that will be run by the Server. This
database path can be located on a local drive of the server
PC. Do not use a directory that is used for other Commence
files such as the Workgroup Administration Files or Program
Directory.
6. When finished filling out the Add Shared Database dialog,
select the OK button to save the changes and create the
shared database. For more information on shared
databases, see the Server Guide (svrguide.pdf), or run
ComAdmin and search for ‘Adding a Shared Database’ in
the on-line help.
Starting the Server
See Also
The Commence server must be running in order to:
set user access
configure client communications
register clients
synchronize data
Before any configuring of the database can begin, the Commence
Server must be running and the Shared Database must be open.
Note: The following procedures assume that the Server was
installed using the default path values. If the Server was
installed in a location other than the default location, some
the menu selections indicated will need to be modified.
Starting the Server:
1. From the Start Menu, select All Programs -> Commence
RM Workgroup -> Commence RM Workgroup.
2. If Commence does not open in the shared database, select
Open/Manage Database and open the desired database.
 
Note: The server MUST be running the shared database in order
for any client to enroll or to have any synchronization occur.
After the Server has been successfully started and the Shared
Database opened, the next step is to establish what the Default
Permissions are to be for a newly added User. Proceed to Set
Default Permissions to continue configuring the Shared
Database.
Note You should always log into the server using the “admin” ID.
If you have more than one shared database, each database
must be opened using a separate copy of Commence. For
more information, see Running Multiple Commence Servers
on One PC.
Configuring Permissions
Commence can control who can see and change information in
the shared database. This section describes how you can
configure the default permissions which are assigned to all new
users added to a Commence workgroup. These default
permissions can be overridden for each user in order to fine-tune
what data they can see or change. Permissions in a Commence
shared database are described in more detail the Server Guide
(svrguide.pdf).
Setting Default Permissions
The default permissions for a shared database are User for the
User Level and All for the Category Permissions. If you do not
want to change these defaults, you can skip this step.
To configure the default permissions for the database:
1. 
Verify that the proper Server database is open.
2. 
Select Customize-Workgroup and then select the Next>
button until you reach the Database Options screen.
3. 
Select the Default Permissions button.
4. 
You can now set the default permissions for the database
and the shared categories in the database. All users are
assigned these default permissions unless you
specifically override them on a per-user basis.
5. 
When completed, select Save.
Setting Client and Server Communications
The Commence server and clients communicate with each other
by sending data files back-and-forth to each other. This
communication can be accomplished by using an FTP directory, a
shared LAN directory or an external e-mail program.
Before configuring the communications information first make a
list of all users and how they should communicate with the server.
If all the users will use the shared LAN directory then there is no
need to set e-mail parameters. If e-mail will be used make sure
that the users have been added to the e-mail program and that
you know their user IDs.
Note The Commence server can synchronize using all available
methods (FTP, shared LAN directory and e-mail) but each
client must choose any one method.
 
image/chiclet.gif Setting Server Communications
image/chiclet.gif Setting Client Communications
Registering Clients
Each client must be registered with the Shared Database.
Registering will create a link between the Clients and the Server.
Registering from the Server will generate an Instruction Sheet,
which is to be given to the appropriate user. This sheet includes
information necessary in order to enroll as a user from the Client
Database. Also, initialization information will be sent to each client
using the communication settings as configured above.
This process gives the Commence administrator full control over
which users can enroll to a shared database. Users cannot enroll
to a shared database without the administrator's knowledge,
because this process gives the Commence administrator full
control over which users can enroll to a shared database. Users
cannot enroll to a shared database without the administrator's
knowledge, because the administrator must register the user for
that specific database ahead of time.
 
Perform the following procedure to register a client with the
shared database:
1. From the Customize Workgroup - Communications Dialog
Box, click Next >. The Customize Workgroup - Register
Dialog Box is displayed.
2. From the list of All Users, highlight the user that is to be
registered with the Shared Database.
3. Click Register. The Register User Dialog Box is displayed.
4. Click OK. An informational Dialog Box is displayed, providing
the authorization key for the user just registered. Additionally,
it will ask if an Instruction Sheet should be generated for this
user.
The instruction sheet provides step–by–step instructions for
enrolling in the shared database. Since the instruction sheet is
a text file generated by Commence, it can be printed out, e–
mailed, or faxed to the user.
The instruction sheet is generated from a template file that
should be customized to include information about the site. At
a minimum, it should include the Commence Administrator’s
name and telephone number so that users can contact the
Administrator if they experience any difficulties. The template
file is a text file that can be edited using any text editor (such
as Notepad or WordPad).
There are three template files included with Commence:
.steps1.txt - is the e–mail template file
.steps2.txt - is the shared LAN template file
.steps8.txt - is the Internet template file
The templates are stored in the server's Admin Path (e.g.,
wgfiles7) which is located in the Application Data directory.
Each template file has special markers that Commence
replaces with the appropriate data to create the instruction
sheet. Some examples of the special markers include (-
Directory-) and (-Serial Number-). Do not remove these
markers or the instruction sheets will be missing vital
information!
5. Click Yes. The Save Dialog Box is displayed.
6. Indicate in which directory the instruction sheet is to be
stored, and what the name of the user–specific sheet is to
be.
7. Click Save. An informational dialog box will be displayed
indicating that the instruction sheet has been successfully
saved.
8. Click OK.
9. Repeat steps 2 through 8 for each user to be Registered with
the Shared Database.
Installing the Client Software
After the Server and Shared Database have each been
configured, Client software must be installed for each user. The
user can install the Client Software themselves, but it must be
verified that the software has been properly installed.
Clients can install the software themselves. However, the
Commence Administrator may be called upon for assistance.
WARNING: If running a Client on the same PC as the Server, DO
NOT install Client Software.
Note: The same installation procedure is followed whether
installing the Client software for the first time or re–
installing software for an existing Client.
 
1. Insert the Commence CD into the computer’s CD ROM drive.
2. If autorun is enabled the CD will run automatically.
Otherwise, select the Run command from the Start menu on
the Windows task bar.
3. Type d:\setup.exe then click OK. This example assumes d:\
is the drive letter that refers to the CD ROM drive. Click the
Browse button if you are unsure of which driver letter to use.
4. An introductory screen will appear. You may click Continue
to proceed or wait for the menu to appear.
5. Click Install to select which software to install. Select
Commece RM Workgroup to begin the server installation.
6. The Software License agreement will be displayed. If you
agree to abide by the terms of the license agreement click
Yes to continue. Clicking No will cancel the setup operation.
7. You will be prompted to enter your user information. You
must enter a valid Commece RM license number in the box
labeled Serial:. This number can be found with the license
agreement in the front of the Getting Started Guide. Click
Next after all the information is entered correctly. Then click
Yes to confirm your registration information.
8. Select Next. Follow the instructions on the screen and enter
the requested information. If additional assistance is required
select the Help button provided on the installation screens.
Enrolling Clients
To become a client in a workgroup, you must register the user to
the shared database at the server. This will generate a instruction
sheet with instructions on how to enroll from the client and send
initialization information to the client. After that, the client can
enroll to the shared database. During this process, the client will
receive a copy of the shared database. The client can complete
this step on their own, but you as the Commence Administrator
may be called upon for assistance. Remember that for a user to
enroll or to transmit or receive updates, the server copy of the
database must be open. The following is how you would enroll a
client.
Perform the following procedure to enroll a client to the shared
database:
1. Verify that the Commence Administrator has registered the
user to be enrolled with the server.
2. Launch Commence at the Client PC.
3. Open a standalone database. This is a database that is neither
a Client Database nor a Server Database. If necessary, create
a new database by using the File -> Open/Manage Database
command.
4. Select Customize -> Workgroup. The Customize Workgroup
– Enroll Client Dialog Box is displayed.
5. Select the Next > button.
6. Enter the authorization key in the space provided. This
number is found on the Instruction Sheet generated when the
Client was registered with the Server, and is available for each
user from the Commence Administrator.
7. Select the Next > button. When each user was registered with
the Commence Server, it was established how the Client
Database would synchronize with the server (i.e. via a shared
LAN directory, by e–mail, or the Internet.) The specific
communications parameters must now be defined in order to
enable the synchronization of data between the Server and
Client Databases.
8. Select Configure. The Workgroup Communications Dialog Box
is displayed.
9. Indicate by which method data synchronization will take place
for the Client that is being enrolled.
10. Click OK and proceed as indicated below. Any information
required may be found by referring to the information sheet
provided by the Commence Administrator.
When synchronizing by Shared LAN, indicate the path to
the Shared LAN Directory, as well as the frequency with
which Commence is to check this shared LAN directory for
synchronization requests. When the information is
complete, select OK. Proceed to step 11.
When synchronizing by E–Mail, select the Mail Program
that will be used, as well as all related information that is
indicated based on the mail program selected. When all
information is complete, select OK. See the following figure.
Indicate the Server E–Mail Address, as well as the
frequency with which Commence is to check the e–mail
program for synchronization requests. When the information
is complete, select OK. Proceed to step 11.
When synchronizing by Internet FTP Directory, enter the full
path to the FTP directory, the user name, and password.
When the information is complete, select OK. Proceed to
step 11.
11. When all Workgroup Communications parameters have been
defined, the Customize Workgroup – Enroll Client Dialog Box
is again displayed. Select the Next > button.
12. Next, information about the Local Database needs to be
completed. Complete the following information for the Local
Database:
Local Database Name - The Local Database Name
appears across the top of the Commence desktop, or when
File -> Open/Manage Database is selected from the Menu
Bar.
Local Database Path - This is the directory in which the
Client Copy of the shared database is stored For example,
c:\commence\clientdb. Do not choose the path of an
existing database, or a directory that contains any files
used by Commence or any other program. If the directory
indicated does not exist, Commence will automatically
create it.
13. Select the Next > button. When all information has been
correctly entered, a message indicating this is displayed.
14. Select Finish. Commence opens the new client database and
proceeds to process the initial sync from the Commence
Server. This downloads all information from the Commence
Server to the Client Database. This may take several minutes.
While Commence is busy, the Sync in Progress Message Box
is displayed.
 
CAUTION The procedure just described must be completed by
each client in order to enroll and obtain a personal copy
of the shared database. It is not possible to simply copy
the shared database for use by a Client.
Note Some information in Commence such as Preferences do not
synchronize regularly, but may sync once during the
initial enrollment to facilitate the client setup.
Note If an error occurs during the enroll process, contact the
Commence Administrator. It will be necessary to Re–
Register the Client with the Commence Server.
 
 
 
 
 
100 This category contains items with duplicate
names. 'Allow Duplicate Names' may not be unchecked while this
is true.
 
All item
names in this category
must be unique before deselecting 'Allow Duplicate Names'.
Either give
all items in the category unique names or delete all but one of
each group of items with the same name. To locate all duplicate
items in the category, create a new view of the category. Then
filter for Name - Has Duplicates.
 
The 'Allow Duplicate Names' option
is found by clicking the Advanced button when Adding, Editing, or
Copying a Category. (See Customize-Database-Category.)
The 'Allow Duplicate Names' option is found by clicking the
Advanced button when Adding, Editing, or Ciopying a Category.
(See Tools-Customize-Database-Category.)
 
 
 
 
101 <Category name> is an invalid category name.
 
You are trying to give the category an invalid name. The name "
(none)" cannot be used as a category name.
102 A category with a recurring date field must allow
duplicate names.
 
If you do not want to allow duplicate names, change the recurring
date field to a regular date field before saving the category.
103 This data directory contains categories which
allow more items than this version of Commence
supports. Commence will now exit.
 
There is at least one category in the selected database directory
that may contain more than the maximum number of items
allowed by the currently running version of Commence. This
database cannot be used by Commence.
 
To specify a different database use the /database= command line
option.
104 Invalid entry; please try again.
110 You cannot delete the Item Name field.
 
Each category has one mandatory field that identifies each item.
The field's type is name and it is labeled Name, by default.
Commence uses this field to sort all book and calendar views.
Default reports are sorted by the name field and default Gantt
charts use the name field as the third sort field (though the sort
fields for these two view types are user-selectable).
 
Although it cannot be deleted, you can change a name type
field's label from Name to whatever you want, though this may
adversely affect any agents that require a name field labeled
Name for this category.
111 Replacing the text will exceed the field's maximum
size. Text cannot be replaced
112 The default string's length is greater than the
field's size. You must reduce the size of the default
string.
 
You must limit the default string to the number of allowable
characters for the field. For example, even though the size of a
default string is 255 characters maximum.
 
Either reduce the length of the default string or increase the size
of the field. Press F1 while a field type is highlighted on the
Add/Edit Field dialog boxes for an explanation of limitations on
the default value for that field type.
113 The default selection must have a label. Change
the default or add a label.
 
The default button must have a label. Add a label for the chosen
button, or change your default button selection.
114 Add another radio button. You must define at least
two buttons.
 
A radio group field requires at least two labeled buttons in order
for the field to be valid. If you want to define a field for a single
option, use a check box field.
115 You cannot delete selections from existing fields.
 
Once you have added selections for a selection field and saved
the category, you cannot remove any of the selections. You can
label or re-label any selection, or you can change the default
selection.
 
If you labeled a selectionby accident and saved the field, but did
not save the change to the new or edited category, select Cancel
until you are back in the work area and begin again. See Editing a
Selection Field for additional considerations.
119 Enter a whole number that is zero or greater for
this field.
 
Sequence numbers must have a starting value of 0 or more.
Enter a value into the field labeled "Initial Value". Do not use a
decimal point.
121 The reserved word [Save, Cancel] cannot be used
as a field name. Please enter a new field name.
 
The words Save and Cancel are labels reserved for use when
adding or editing items. Choose a different name before
proceeding.
122 Multiple radio buttons have the same name. Make
each name unique.
 
All radio buttons must have unique names.
123 The maximum number of characters cannot be
greater than 30,000.
 
The maximum number of characters for a text field is 30,000. If
you use such a large field, be aware that it requires a great deal
of memory and may keep you from using other functions.
125 This equation has an unrecognized field name,
operator or delimiter. Please correct the equation
before proceeding.
 
A calculation field can only be defined for number, date, and time
fields. Only the delimiters of +, -, /, *, (, ), and the currency
symbol ($ in the United States and some other countries) defined
in the Windows Control Panel are valid.
126 Please enter a whole number between 1 and <8>
for ‘Buttons Per Row’.
 
The Buttons Per Row field accepts whole numbers from 1 to 8.
129 There is a maximum of one Sequence number field
per category. Delete any extra sequence number
fields.
 
A category can only have one sequence number type field. You
must delete all but one sequence number type field in order to
save your changes to this category.
130 The formula entered is too long. It cannot be
saved.
 
The number of fields in the calculation equation (including
duplicates) plus the number of mathematical symbols used
(including parentheses) cannot exceed 20. For example, the
formula ([Miles]*[Rate]) has a length of five (two field names,
one asterisk, and two parentheses).
131 There is a maximum of one recurring date field per
category. Deselect this option from all but one
date field.
 
A category can have at most one date field that has the
Recurring Date Field check box turned on. Edit the date type
fields in this category, and make sure that one of them at most
has this check box turned on.
132 Enter an initial sequence number less than
2,000,000,000.
 
The initial sequence number must be less than or equal to
2,000,000,000 (two billion).
133 The formula for the calculation field <field name>
contains a field name that is no longer valid.
Delete this calculation field or change its formula.
 
The calculation equation contains one or more fields that were
probably deleted. Remove the invalid field(s) named in the error
message from the calculation or delete the calculation field from
the category. Use the Customize-Database-Category command to
edit the category and delete the field.
140 Select a 'From' category and ‘To’ category before
continuing.
 
Highlight a category name in both the From and To list boxes to
define a connection. You can use the same category for both
sides of the connection.
141 Internal error during connection initialization - call
technical support.
 
Contact Commence Technical Support and report this message
(Select Help-About)
142 Give the connections different names.
 
A connection between the same category must be unique. Enter a
unique name for each connection and try again.
144 There is not enough room to add this connection
to the <category name> category.
 
No more connections can be added to this category. Delete an
existing connection (or one or more fields) before adding any new
ones.
 
Remember, a paired connection (between two categories) counts
as two fields, a simple connection (between a category and itself)
counts as one field.
145 Warning for category <category name>: If you edit
the name of or delete this connection, recurring
items will no longer be associated and cannot be
edited or deleted in a group.
 
Commence uses a simple connection called Related Date to
associate recurring items with each other. If you delete this
connection or change its name you will be unable to edit or delete
recurring items as a group.
147 The connection <connection name> is reserved
for connecting recurring items. Commence creates
this connection automatically when recurring
items are added. Rename this connection or
cancel this operation.
 
Commence uses a simple connection called Related Date to
associate recurring items with each other. Change the connection
name to something other than Related Date.
150 This field cannot be removed from the detail form
because it is the name field or it is a mandatory
field without a default value.
 
Each category has one mandatory, unique field of type name that
identifies the item and cannot be removed from the detail form.
 
Also, all fields that have the Mandatory Field check box turned
on when defined, but do not have a Default Value, must also
appear on the form. Other mandatory fields (with a default value)
may be removed from the form. They will be assigned their
default values on saving an item regardless of whether they
appear on a particular detail form or not.
152 The detail form cannot be deleted since it is the
only one defined for this category.
 
Every category must contain at least one detail form, so that you
can add and display items.
153 There are no attributes to set for this field type.
 
Excel cell and data file type fields have no attributes to set.
154 Enter a valid width greater than 0 and no more
than 250 characters.
 
The visible field width is limited to between 0 and 250 characters.
Adjust the field width to be within these limits.
155 Enter a valid height greater than 0 and no more
than 50 lines.
 
The visible field height is limited to between 0 and 50 lines. Adjust
the field height to be within these limits.
156 Enter a valid number for the visible size that is
greater than 0 but does not exceed 20 inches or
50.8 centimeters.
 
For image type fields, the visible field size (width or height) must
not exceed 20 inches (50.8 centimeters).
157 Add at least one field to this form before saving it.
 
A detail form must have at least one field. Use the Add Field
button to add a field to the detail form.
163 Warning: Incoming E-Mail will not processed since
no E-Mail program has been configured. Select
Edit-Preferences-Other Apps to add E-Mail
information.
 
Commence needs some information before it can properly
interact with your mail
program. Please enter this information using Edit-Preferences-
Other Apps.
164 Select appropriate date/time fields before
continuing.
 
In order to proceed, you must select a date and time field from
the selected category.
165 The limit of <number> Tool Bar Pick agents per
database has been reached. Either select a
different trigger for this agent, or deactivate other
Tool Bar Pick agents.
 
To free up a space, make an agent that uses the Agent Tool bar
inactive, change the trigger of an agent from Tool Bar Pick to
Menu Pick (with the same category selection), or delete an active
agent using a Tool bar Pick trigger if it is no longer needed.
166 Define at least one trigger and one action before
saving this agent.
 
An agent consists of at least one trigger and one action.
167 A trigger must be defined before you can define a
condition or an action.
 
In order to define a condition or an action, a trigger must be
defined first (select the T button or press ALT-T).
168 You must provide [Menu Text, a DDE Message,
Status Bar Message Text, a Message, an
Application path name, all requested information,
a path name, a name] before continuing.
 
There is textual information required by this function, trigger, or
action. Enter the information specified before proceeding.
169 Select a view before continuing.
 
A view must be selected from the list provided in order for
Commence to accept the Icon Modification Action. Only views
that can be accessed from the view bar are listed (i.e., the views
that have Display on View Bar turned on via the Customize-
Design View command).
170 This action requires a trigger/condition selection
with only one selected category.
 
You have selected an action that requires a single category
selection. Change the trigger and/or conditions for this action so
that at least one of them specifies a particular category as part of
its options. If you cannot, you not be able to use this action as
specified. (Press F1 for specific help while editing a trigger,
condition, or action).
171 You entered an invalid number of items. Enter a
number from 0 to 500000 before continuing.
 
A category can contain from 0 to 500000 items. Your item count
value does not fall within these limits.
172 This command requires you to highlight an item in
the <category name> category.
 
This agent cannot be triggered until you highlight an item in the
category specified
173 Cannot save the actions. Each button label and
corresponding action must be defined in pairs.
 
Each message box action button, if labeled, needs an associated
action before continuing. Each message box action, if defined,
needs an associated action button label before continuing.
174 Please enter the required value before continuing.
 
A required value was not entered. Please enter the value before
continuing.
175 Select a field before continuing.
 
In order to proceed, you must select a number or calculation field
from the selected category.
176 The Agent tool bar position you have chosen is
already in use or the Tools Menu is full. The agent
cannot be activated.
 
In order to activate an agent that uses a Tool Bar Pick or Menu
Pick trigger, there must be at least one free space on the agent
tool bar or the Tools menu. The Tools menu is capable of holding
up to 16 agents with Menu Pick triggers.
177 The hotkey for this trigger is already used by the
agent '<agent name>'. Please select a different
hotkey.
 
178 Before continuing, please provide a valid [date,
time, year, Start Time, End Time, Menu Text, DDE
Message, Status Bar Message].
 
There is date/time information required by this trigger or action.
Enter the information specified in the message before
proceeding.
179 Enter between [1 and 60, 0 and 59] minutes before
continuing.
 
You must enter a valid range of minutes before proceeding.
180 Select Print Options before continuing.
 
You have not yet selected print options for this action. Select the
Print Options button.
181 The ‘Process E-Mail’ action can only be used with
the ‘Incoming Communications: E-Mail’ trigger.
Please use the appropriate trigger or select a
different action.
 
The Process E-Mail action can be used only if the trigger is
Incoming Communication: E-Mail. The agent does not currently
satisfy this requirement. Either change the trigger to Incoming
Communication: E-Mail or select a different action.
182 The limit of 16 Menu Pick agents had been
reached. Either select a different trigger for this
agent or deactivate other Menu Pick agents.
 
In order to activate an agent that uses a Menu Pick trigger, there
must be at least one free space on the Tools menu. The Tools
menu is capable of holding up to 16 agents with Menu Pick
triggers.
183 This trigger/condition/action requires that at least
one category or view be defined.
 
For this trigger, condition, or action to be accepted by
Commence, at least one category (or view of a category) must be
defined.
184 The field '<field name>' is mandatory and no
default value is available. It cannot be left blank.
 
Supply a value for the specified field, or edit the category so that
the field is no longer mandatory. Item name fields are always
mandatory.
185 The field '<field name>' is mandatory and no
default value is available. It cannot be left blank.
Select 'Field Values...' or check 'Display Item(s)'
before proceeding.
 
Select the Field Values button and supply a value for the
specified field, or edit the category so that the field is no longer
mandatory. Item name fields are always mandatory. If you turn on
the Display Item(s) check box instead, you do not need to fill in
any mandatory fields.
186 The field '<field name>' does not translate to a
valid field in the <category name> category.
 
The specified field name does not exist in the specified category.
If you associate this action with a trigger or condition that can use
items from any category (i.e., All Categories in the Menu Pick or
Tool Bar Pick triggers) you can use field names that are common
across more than one category. Note that untranslated field
names (depending on the selected category at the time the agent
is triggered) will not be replaced by field values when the action is
executed.
187 Enter a time interval between 0 minutes and 23
hours, 59 minutes.
 
Enter a time interval within the specified range before continuing.
188 You must check 'added to', 'edited in', or both
before continuing.
 
The Save Item trigger can be triggered upon adding an item,
editing an item, or both. At least one of these check boxes must
be checked before the trigger can be accepted by Commence.
193 The maximum number of messages that can be
snoozed has been reached.
 
There are already 100 snoozed messages and Commence
cannot snooze any more messages. Press the OK button instead
of the Snooze button.
194 Enter a valid snooze time between 1 and 999
minutes.
 
The length of time for a snooze period must at least one minute
and at most 999 minutes.
195 Cannot create a Sync Link Out Agent. No remote
databases defined. Use File - Sync Link Out to add
one.
 
A Sync Link Out agent will create an update file for a remote
database. You must first use the File-Sync Link Out command
and select the Add button to create a remote database, then you
can define a Sync Link Out agent.
Using Sync Link Commands
If you are using several PCs and are not on a LAN, you can still
maintain identical databases by using the Sync Link feature.
With Sync Link, you can create a compressed update file from
the designated base PC and read it into the remote PCs. See
Sync Link Concepts for an more complete explanation of the
Sync Link facility.
This section describes procedures for using the sync link group
and for adding, editing, and deleting remote databases. To see
more about a procedure, select a topic from the list below or use
the Browse >> button to see each topic in order:
1. Defining the Sync link Group
2. Creating the Initial Update Files
3. Initializing Remote Databases
4. Using the Sync link Group
For more details, see the Sync Link Out and Sync Link In
commands and their options.
196 Cannot create an [Import or Export] Agent. Use
File - [Import or Export] to add an [Import or
Export] template.
 
An Import agent will read an external file into the open database..
You must first use the File-Import command and select the Add
button to create an import template, then you can define an
Import agent.
 
An Export agent will create an external file from data in the open
database.. You must first use the File-Export by View or File-
Export by Category command and select the Add button to create
an export template, then you can define an Export agent.
197 Multimedia functions unavailable.
 
Windows is not configured with the proper multimedia extensions.
The Play Multimedia
action is not available.
198 CouldnÆt open multimedia file: <file name>.
 
Windows is not configured with the proper multimedia extensions
to play this file. Install
the proper Windows multimedia drivers or select a different type
of multimedia file for the
action.
200 Cannot display the legend. Select a color code
template first.
 
Select the Customize-Design View-Colors command and then
select a color code template. If a suitable template doesn't exist,
create one by selecting the Customize-Database-Color Code
command.
202 The view will not be displayed because a field of
type <field type> was not found in this category.
 
You tried to display a new calendar or Gantt chart view, but the
selected category did not contain a date field. Calendar views
need at least one date field; Gantt chart views need at least two
date fields.
203 No image packs have been installed.
 
An image pack is a collections of pictures that can be displayed
on-screen by the
Commence calendar view when in Image mode. No image packs
are currently installed.
Contact the Jensen-Jones Sales Department for information
about obtaining image packs.
204 The Time Conflict layout you selected is not valid.
Try again.
 
In order for a Time Conflict layout to be valid, you must specify
fields for Commence to associate with the date, start time, and
end time of an item. Once this is done, check the Time Conflict
check box to enable Time Conflict checking for the specified
category.
205 Couldn't create a default view for the <category
name> category. The maximum number of views
may have been reached.
 
Commence automatically tries to create a default report view for a
newly defined category. This was not done for the named
category since the new view could not be added. It may be that
the maximum of 600 views per database has been reached for
the currently open database. Count the number of views listed in
the dialog box displayed by the Views-Open/Manage Views
command to see if you have reached this limit. Use the Delete
button to delete views that you no longer need.
206 The combined fields exceed the number of fields
allowed by the view. Please remove some fields
before saving.
 
The view you have defined contains more fields than the view will
allow. Select the Customize-Design View-Fields command. Count
the number of fields in the view. Each field in a combined field
must be counted individually. Use the Remove Field button to
remove any fields that you no longer need to display or use the
Edit Combined Field button to include fewer fields in the
combined field.
207 The latest possible start time using this time
interval is <time>.
 
The calendar view (when in daily display mode) is designed to
show 19 time slots regardless of the time interval (scale)
selected. You must select a start time that will allow 19 time slots
to be displayed in daily display mode using the currently selected
time scale. Either decrease the current time scale value (using
the Customize-Design View-Display command, or change the
start time to an earlier time.
208 The date, start time or end time field has not been
selected or is invalid for this function. Choose
your selections with the Customize-Design View-
Fields command.
 
The design for the selected view has become invalid. Select
Customize-Design View-Fields and choose appropriate fields for
this view. If appropriate fields are not available, add them using
Customize-Database-Category. Edit the category, then press the
Add button to add new fields.
209 A required field was set to '(none)'. The
appropriate default field(s) have been selected.
 
You have changed at least one of the required calendar design
fields (Date, Start Time, or End Time) to (none). Default fields
have been selected for the missing required field(s).
210 The Calendar design you selected is not valid. Try
again.
 
The design for a calendar view requires that one date field and
two time fields be associated with the view. Choose appropriate
fields for this view. If appropriate fields are not available, add
them using Customize-Database-Category. Edit the category,
then press the Add button to add new fields.
211 Select an item in the calendar. The highlight must
be positioned on the name of the item to select it.
 
To select an item from a calendar view, the item name must be
highlighted. (Highlighting a blank time slot associated with an
item does not select the item.)
212 Please enter a valid time for the Start Time of the
Calendar.
 
The calendar start time specified must be consistent with the time
format set in the Windows Control Panel (via the International
icon).
213 The start date or end date field has not been
selected or is invalid for this function. Choose
your selections with the Customize-Design View-
Fields command.
 
The design for the selected view has become invalid. Select
Customize-Design View-Fields and choose appropriate fields for
this view. If appropriate fields are not available, add them using
Customize-Database-Category. Edit the category, then press the
Add button to add new fields.
214 The Gantt design you selected is not valid. Try
again.
 
The design for a Gantt chart view requires that two date fields be
associated with the view. Choose appropriate fields for this view.
If appropriate fields are not available, add them using Customize-
Database-Category. Edit the category, then press the Add button
to add new fields.
215 Enter an Indent value greater than or equal to zero
and less than [5.0 inches or 12.7 centimeters].
 
The value for the Indent field must be between zero and five
inches or zero and 12.7 centimeters.
216 Time Conflict checking requires that the category
have at least one date and one time field. Either
edit the category and add the required fields or
select a different category.
 
Time Conflict checking is used to alert you if you have added an
item on the same date and time as another item. The category
you have selected does not have the required fields to use time
conflict checking. You can edit the category using the Customize-
Database-Category command. Select the Edit button to edit the
category. Add at least one date field and at least one time field to
the category. Otherwise, select a different category to use time
conflict checking.
217 The Highlight color must be changed so it is
different from the Background color, otherwise the
view highlight will not be visible.
 
The color you have selected for your Highlight is the same color
as the Background for the view. The highlight color should be set
to a contrast color, so that it will be visible against the
background. For example, if your Background color is white, you
should set the Highlight color to black, or any color which will be
clearly visible on a white background. Use the Customize-Design
View-Colors command to change the Highlight or Background
color.
218 Decrease the field width to between 1 and 150
columns.
 
In a report view, the field width can be between one and 150
columns.
219 The field height must be between 1 and 750 lines.
 
In a report view, the field height can be between one and 750
lines.
220 Add at least one field to this report before saving
it.
 
A report view must contain at least one field before it can be
saved to disk. See Customize-Design View-Fields.
221 Enter a valid [horizontal or vertical] spacing
between zero and [5.0 inches or 12.7 centimeters].
 
The values for the horizontal and vertical spacing of fields must
be between zero and 5 inches or zero and 12.7 centimeters.
225 Vertical reports can have between 1 and 20
columns. Horizontal reports can have only one
column.
 
A report view must have between 1 and 20 columns. Horizontal
format report views can only have one column. Change the report
format type to vertical, or change the number of columns to one.
229 Connected fields can have a total of 750 lines. The
total you have entered is <number> lines. Either
set the number of items to <number> or set the
lines per item to <number>, or simply decrease
both values.
 
A connected field can be no more than 750 lines long. Use the
Customize-Design View-Display command to change the number
of items or set the number of lines in the Connection Fields group
box.
230 The number of instances must be between 1 and
750.
 
The maximum number of connected items that can be shown in a
connected field (the number of instances) is 750.
232 No more fields can be included in this report.
Remove some fields first if you wish to add others.
 
A report view can contain up to 100 fields. You need to remove a
field from this view if you wish to add another field.
233 For connected fields, Commence can only sort on
the Name field in the connected category. You
have selected a connected field that is not the
Name field.
 
When using connected fields, Commence can only sort on the
name field of a connected category.
234 You have selected a type of field that Commence
cannot sort on. Please select a different field.
 
Commence can sort on any field in a view except connected
fields and data file fields. You can, however, sort on the name
field of a connected item.
240 This file is not in the proper format: '<filename>'.
 
The specified file must be in the proper Commence format before
proceeding with a restore (the file must have been produced
using the Backup button on the Manage Database dialog box) ,
Transfer In.(the file must have been produced using the File-
Transfer Out command) or Sync Link.
241 [Backup, Restore] did not complete.
 
The backup or restore operation was not completed. You may
have run out of disk space, a disk error may have occurred, or
you may have run out of available memory or buffers If you
suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any
problems before trying again.
244 The backup file cannot be created in the database
directory. Select a different directory for the
backup file.
 
To protect against accidental deletions the backup file cannot be
created in the actual
database directory. Try the backup again using a different
directory for the backup file.
245 The [definition] could not be transferred in
because the [definition] was not found in this
database.
 
This error is displayed when Commence is processing a Transfer
In request and a definition (field, connection definition, category,
view, etc.) is not present in the target database that is required by
the definition be transferred in. Check the Transfer Out options to
see if all the related definitions were included when the transfer
file was created.
246 This database is password protected. Make sure
you remember its password because you will need
to know it when it is restored.
 
This is an informational message that appears when you Backup
a database which has a password defined with the Edit-
Preferences-Database command. When Commence backs up a
database that has a password, the password in included in the
backup file. You must know the password to open the database
after restoring it with the File-Open/Manage Database command.
247 The file '<filename>' is a backup file and must be
restored using File- Open/Manage Database-
Restore.
 
You have tried to use Transfer In or SyncLink In on this backup
file. Typically, files with a '.XFR' extension are backup files and
are accessed using File-Open/Manage Database-Restore. Files
with a '.TFR' extension are transfer files and are accessed using
File-Transfer In. Files with a '.SNC' extension are SyncLink files
for use with File-SyncLink In.
248 The file '<filename>' is a transfer file and must be
handled using File-Transfer In.
 
You have tried to use Restore or SyncLink In on this transfer file.
Typically, files with a '.TFR' extension are transfer files and are
accessed using File-Transfer In '.XFR' extension are backup files
and are accessed using File-Open/Manage Database-
Restore.Files with a '.SNC' extension are SyncLink files for use
with File-SyncLink In.
249 The file '<filename>' is a sync link file and must be
handled using File- Sync Link In.
 
You have tried to use Transfer In or Restore on this SyncLink file.
Typically, files with a '.SNC' extension are SyncLink files for use
with File-SyncLink In. Files with a '.TFR' extension are transfer
files and are accessed using File-Transfer In. Files with a '.XFR'
extension are backup files and are accessed using the File-
Open/Manage Databasecommand, then press the Restore
button.
250 The transfer or sync file '<filename> is from a
newer version of Commence and cannot be
processed. You must upgrade to the newer version
in order to process this file.
 
251 The transfer or sync file '<filename>' is from a
older version of Commence and cannot be
processed
260 Could not execute DDE command!
 
The receiving application has not responded to a Dynamic Data
Exchange (DDE) command within the timeout period. Make sure
the other application is running before retrying.
262 Could not communicate with application:
<application name>.
 
A Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) error has occurred with the
application noted in the message. Make sure the other application
is running before retrying.
270 Check the export template. It does not match the
data. Commence cannot continue exporting.
 
Check the number of fields you are exporting and be sure that the
template mapping is correct. (See the Template Mapping dialog
box.)
271 Define the category <category name> so that
Commence can import the file.
 
The category that was used for this template is no longer
available. Create the category again, or delete this template.
272 Enter a positive number less than 32,767 for the
Start and End positions.
 
The Start Position and End Position value must be a positive
integer that is greater than zero and less than 32767. Do not use
decimal points.
274 Commence cannot save an imported item. The
import will end.
 
A disk error occurred while trying to save an imported item. Is the
import file formatted correctly? If you suspect disk or file
problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any problems before
trying again. If the problem persists, contact Commence
Technical Support (select the Help-About command).
275 Unrecognized format in the import file. Make sure
file is in DIF format.
 
Make sure the file you are trying to import is in DIF format and
that you are using the correct import/export template.
276 Commence did not find the text delimiter for a
field and cannot import the file.
 
Change your Import Rules to reflect the lack of delimiters, or
obtain an import file that contains appropriate delimiters. See
File-Import.
277 Record <record number>, Field <field name> of
this import file does not map to a field, and
Commence cannot continue importing.
 
Check the format of your import file and your mapping scheme.
See File-Import.
278 There are no items in the export category.
 
There is nothing to export. Check the category name and the
template definition to ensure that you are exporting the correct
category using the appropriate template. See the Template
Mapping dialog box.
279 Make the 'End Position' greater than the 'Start
Position'.
 
The End Position must be greater than the Start Position when
defining column-delimited fields.
280 You defined field positions for <field name> that
overlap with those defined for <field name>.
 
Check the sizes of your import category fields to be sure the start
and end positions do not overlap.
281 Commence cannot save the template. The item
name field must map to an import field.
 
You must map the item name field to a field in the import file in
order to save the template.
282 Delete this import template. It is associated with a
category that no longer exists.
 
The category associated with this import template no longer
exists. The template cannot be used. Either import the
appropriate category before using this template or use the Delete
button to delete the template.
283 The specified file is not in the proper format (<file
format>).
 
ASCII, dBASE, and DIF import/export file formats are supported
by Commence. The file you specified is not in one of these
formats. Check the file or specify another one.
284 The dBASE field <field name> cannot be imported
into the Commence field <field name>. They are of
conflicting types.
 
The type of a dBASE field must be compatible with the type of the
Commence field to which it is mapped. Correct the field mapping
of the import template, and try again. See the Template Mapping
dialog box.
285 The number of columns in this DIF file (<number>)
is not the same as was given in the import
template. Commence cannot continue importing.
 
The file does not match the import template. Check the number of
fields in the file, correct the import template, and try the import
again. See the Template Mapping dialog box.
286 Record <number>, Field <number> of this import
file <error condition>. Commence cannot continue
importing.
 
Correct the error indicated in the information message for the
given record and field in the import file, and try the import again.
287 Cannot add more fields. Cannot import from a file
with more than 102 fields.
 
You can map up to 102 fields in your import file to fields in the
Commence category.
288 Record <record> is too long to be imported.
 
There are restrictions on the size of records (i.e., items) and
fields you import. The maximum record size is 1,020 characters.
The maximum field size is 255 characters.
289 Record <record>, Field <field> of this import file
<condition>. Commence cannot continue
importing. The field's value is <value>.
 
You receive this message under a variety of conditions while
importing data. The message indicates the record, field, value,
and the reason Commence stopped importing. There are a
number of reasons you may see in place of <condition> in the
above message, all of which involve incompatibility of the data
being imported. Correct the error indicated in the information
message for the given record and field in the import file, and try
the import again.
290 The maximum number (500000) of items was
reached for this category. Not all records were
imported.
 
Importing stops when you have reached the maximum number of
items that can be kept in a single category (500000).
291 Import field <field 1>, mapped to Commence field
<field 2>, must be given start and end positions.
 
When importing column-delimited data, you must specify start
and end positions for each input field. Edit the import/export
template you are using to make sure the start and end positions
you specified for <field 1> are correct.
 
To correct the problem, select the Map button; then highlight the
field named in the message and select the Field Position button.
Specify start and end positions for the field in the dialog box that
appears.
294 The number of fields in this file does not match
the number defined in the import template. Cannot
import.
 
The number of fields in the file you want to import is not the same
as the number you specified in the import/export template. Check
the number of fields in the file, edit the template accordingly, and
then try importing again. See the Template Mapping dialog box.
295 The Commence mandatory field <field> is not
mapped to an import field and has no default
string defined. Halting import.
 
A mandatory field in Commence must have a field mapped to it,
or the field must have a default value, in order for Commence to
import the file. Edit the import/export template to map a field (see
the Template Mapping dialog box) or edit the category to specify
a default value (see Customize-Database-Category), and then try
importing again.
296 There were connections to unknown items in the
<category name> category (for example, the item
<item name>.) These connections could not be
made.
 
A connection to a non-existent item was specified in the import
file. The connection was not made. See Importing Connections.
297 Commence cannot save the template because the
mapping is not valid for this category.
 
Correct the mapping values and try again. See the Template
Mapping dialog box.
298 Cannot find matching memo file: <filename>.
 
During an Import Commence could not find the memo file related
to a dBASE file. Check the directory specified for the import file.
299 Experienced internal error during import - call
technical support.
 
During an Import Commence experienced an unexpected error.
Before calling technical support try the following.
 
Create a new import file and try the import again.
Recreate the import template being used to create the import file.
Create a new import file and try the import again.
If the import file is in dBASE format, attempt to open the file using
another application that can read a dBASE formatted file (e.g.
Excel) and then save as a new file.
 
If the problem persists, contact Commence Technical Support
(select Help-About).
300 You cannot delete the active Database.
 
To delete the database you are currently using, first switch to a
different database, then try deleting the original database again.
301 Please enter text for the template before saving.
 
You have not entered text for the text letter template. Commence
cannot save an empty text letter template.
302 To define a color code, a category must have a
check box, a selection field, or a connection field.
The selected category contains none of these
fields. Please select another category.
 
Color codes can only be associated with a check box, a selection
field, or a connection definition.
303 You have selected an item more than once. Select
unique items.
 
When you created a color code template, you selected the same
item more than once. Each control must be matched to a unique
item. Change the duplicate items and save the template.
304 Delete the invalid keyword <keyword> from the
letter template.
 
There is an invalid keyword in the letter template. Delete the
keyword shown in the error message, or change it to a valid
keyword.
305 There is not a data file field in the category
<category name>.
 
The category you select to log letters must have a data file field
defined. Use Customize-Database-Category to edit the category
and add a data file field, and try again; or, pick another category
for your letter log.
308 Text letter templates are limited to 16000
characters. You have reached this limit. If you are
pasting from the clipboard, reduce the amount of
text being pasted and try again.
 
Text letter templates are limited to 16,000 characters. The actual
text letter (after field values are substituted) can be up to 32,767
characters.
309 Select a category for the phone log.
 
In order to log a phone call, you must associate a category with
the phone log by selecting Edit-Preferences Event Logs
command from the menu bar.
310 The telephone number format is unrecognized and
cannot be dialed.
 
TAPI could not interpret the telephone number, it may contain
invalid characters or be improperly formatted. To help TAPI
recognize the telephone number please re-format the number
using the 'canonical format' which is of the form +cc (ac) number
where cc is the country code, ac is the area code and number is
the local telephone number. For example, +1 (908) 555-1234 is in
canonical format.
311 Commence cannot dial because the phone line is
currently in use. Please try again later when the
phone line is free.
 
TAPI allows multiple phone applications to share the same
telephone line(s). All phone
lines are currently busy.
312 Commence cannot add <path> as a database
since it is the <directory type>.
 
The directory used for the Commence database must be devoted
exclusively to Commence. The database files cannot reside in the
Windows directory, the DOS TEMP directory, the Commence
program directory or other special directories. Specify a different
directory for the database.
313 You cannot delete the active desktop.
 
You have tried to delete the desktop that is currently being
displayed. Open another desktop before deleting this one.
317 The selected Icon Directory is not a valid
directory. Please change the selection with the
Edit-Preferences-Tool Bars command.
 
Commence could not find the directory on the disk. Select the
Edit-Preferences-Tool Bars command and enter an existing
directory path.
318 You must either change the number of digits
required or enter <number> digits.
 
The Base Format must contain exactly the number of digits
specified within the Digits group box. Either enter this number or
change the total number of digits in the Digits group box to an
appropriate value.
319 The selected External Data File Directory is not a
valid directory. Please change the selection with
the Edit-Preferences-Other command.
 
Commence could not find the directory on the disk. Select the
Edit-Preferences-Other command and enter an existing directory
path.
322 TXT is reserved for use with Text Letters only.
Enter a different formatted letter extension.
 
Formatted letter extensions can consist of any three letters
except the extension .txt, which is reserved for text letters.
323 Delete an existing [Agent, Category, Connection,
View, Icon View, Menu View, Field, Template,
Database, Form] before adding another. The
maximum amount has been reached.
 
You have reached the limit of the specified object.
324 Name the [Category, Connections, Form,
Template, Item, Field, View] before proceeding.
 
You must name the object in the message before continuing. The
name you specify must be unique for all the objects of the same
type within the active database.
325 The name for [Agent, Template, View, First
Connection, Second Connection, Import Template,
Database, Item, Form, Field, Category] already
exists. Use a different name.
 
An object of the same type as the one you are naming already
exists with the same name. Specify a unique name.
326 The database <database name> already uses this
path. Use a different path name.
 
Two databases cannot share the same directory. Either enter a
new directory name (eight characters or less) or hit the Select
button to select the new directory. If the directory does not exist
Commence will create the directory
327 In order to schedule a meeting a category
(including date, start time and end time fields)
must be selected.
 
A category (e.g. Appointment) must be selected before a meeting
can be scheduled. Select Edit-Preferences-Meeting and select a
category.
328 The database <database name> already exists.
Use a different name.
 
Two databases cannot have the same name. Enter a new
database name. The maximum number of characters for the
database name is thirty. The database name can contain multiple
words.
329 The desktop <desktop name> already exists. Use
a different name.
 
Two desktops cannot have the same name. Enter a new desktop
name.
330 The item <item name> already exists. Use a
different name.
331 The selection <selection name> already exists.
Use a different name.
370 The new password did not verify correctly; please
enter the new password again.
 
When you are changing your database password or your login
password, Commence requires you to type the new password in
twice. The purpose is to verify that you entered the password as
you intended. Since the text boxes only show your entry on the
screen as asterisks '*', this is done in case you mistype the
password.
 
This message is displayed when the new password is not entered
the same in the verify edit control. To correct the problem, re-
enter the new password and the verify password.
371 Unable to change password, the old password is
incorrect. Please enter the old password again.
 
When you are changing your database password or your login
password, Commence requires you to first type the old password.
The purpose is to verify that you have access to the database to
change the password.
 
This message is displayed when the old password is entered
incorrectly. It does not match the password for the database. To
correct the problem, re-enter the old password. You do not have
to re-enter the new password and the verify password.
372 A password must be set for the database to be
password protected; either turn off the password
checkbox or set a password.
 
You have checked the Password Protect Database checkbox in
the Database Preferences dialog box, but you did not enter a
password when prompted. You must enter a password or, if you
do not want to password protect your database, uncheck the
Password Protect Database checkbox. You can not close this
dialog box until you enter a password or uncheck the checkbox.
373 Cannot add an item. No categories have been
defined.
 
Commence cannot add an Item. Before attempting to add an item
a category must be created. Use the Customize-Database-
Category command to create a category.
374 Cannot save User Item information. No item
selected.
 
Commence cannot add an Item for Yourself because a name was
not entered. See the Personal Info dialog box.
375 Cannot save User Item information in a database
with no categories.
 
Commence cannot add an Item for Yourself because the active
database is empty. Use the File-Open/Manage Database
command to select a different database.
400 Enter a value for the filter.
 
You must enter text to filter each item displayed. Enter an
appropriate value for the field you specified.
401 The view <view name> cannot be used as a
primary view since it does not have connections to
other active views. Select a different primary view,
try linking by date or start an appropriate
secondary view.
 
Views can be linked so that the highlighted item in the primary
view controls what is displayed in the secondary view. View
linking requires that a connection exists between the primary view
category and the secondary view category. If no connection exists
then the views cannot be linked.
402 The filter for view <view name> cannot be
modified to link the views. Clear the filter and try
again.
 
Views are linked by creating a special filter in the secondary view.
If the secondary view already has the maximum number of filters
then additional view links cannot be created.
403 The category <category name> does not have any
Date fields and cannot be linked by date. Select a
different secondary view or try linking by
connection.
 
Views can be linked so that the selected date or date range a
Calendar view controls what is displayed in the secondary view.
The secondary view must have a date field, if no date field exists
then the views cannot be linked.
404 One of your filters is set to 'OR (All Items)'. This
will cause all items to be selected regardless of
the settings of any other filters. Please select the
summary tab and change the AND/OR relationship
to make your filter work.
 
This filter will not work properly. Any filter specifying (All Items)
must have the And check box before it turned on. Make sure the
filter is set to AND (All Items).
405 Enter the search text.
 
Enter an appropriate value for the search text you would like to
find. You can use wild card patterns to search for values.
406 The two views are already linked. Specify different
views to link or select Cancel.
 
Views can only be linked once. Select a different view for the view
link.
407 The secondary view must have a date field but
there are no active views with date fields. Start a
secondary view that has a date field or use the
‘Connected to highlighted item’ option.
 
Views can be linked so that the selected date or date range a
Calendar view controls what is displayed in the secondary view.
The secondary view must have a date field, if no date field exists
then the views cannot be linked.
408 Please enter a valid telephone number.
 
409 Invalid field value specified, could not process
410 There is no item to copy.
 
Highlight an item to copy, and try again. Open the appropriate
view or item detail if necessary.
411 The maximum number (32000) of items has been
reached for category <category name>. You must
delete an existing item before adding a new one.
 
You have reached Commence's capacity for storing items in a
single category. Delete an item from the category or see File-
Export-By Category to find out how to archive items from a
category.
412 The date <date field> is not valid.
 
You must enter a valid date in the named field. The date must be
in the Short Date format specified in the International dialog box
in the Windows Control Panel, or in a natural language format.
413 The recognizer is busy. Try again later.
 
The Microsoft Recognizer (used by Microsoft Windows for Pen
Computing®) is already busy analyzing pen input.
414 The default value entered is not valid for this field.
Try again.
 
The default value does not match the field type. Enter a value
that is appropriate for the field type or delete the default value.
415 Can't display this item.
 
Contact Commence Technical Support and report this message
(select Help-About).
416 Please enter a valid Start and End date before
continuing.
 
In order to use recurring dates, you must give Commence a range
of dates to use when adding the new item. The range begins on
the start date and finishes on the end date.
418 The 'Related Date' connection could not be added
for this category. You must either delete a field or
a connection before recurring date items in this
category can be associated.
 
Defining a date field with the Recurring option causes a Related
Date connection to be generated automatically. Since you are
already too close to the maximum number of fields and
connections, you must delete one in order to successfully define
a Recurring Date field.
420 No items were added. No actual dates match the
recurring date specification.
 
You must enter a recurring date specification that results in a
valid set of dates for the recurring date specification. For
example, "Every 31st weekday of the month" does not refer to a
valid set of dates because there are never more than 23
weekdays in a given month.
421 You can only send letters from a book view, a
report view or while editing a previously saved
item.
 
Only book and report views and existing (i.e., saved) item details
can be used to create a letter. Be sure that the category you are
viewing has at least one letter template defined (see Customize-
Database-Letter Template).
422 There is no window open, so no letter can be sent.
 
Only views and item details can be used to create a letter. Be
sure that the category you are viewing has at least one letter
template defined (see Customize-Database-Letter Template).
423 Commence cannot log this letter. Select a log
category first using Edit-Preferences-Event Logs.
 
In order to log a letter, a letter log category must be specified
using the Edit-Preferences-Event Logs command.
424 There are no letter templates defined for this
category. You can define letter templates using
Customize-Database-Letter Template.
 
Commence cannot create a letter for this category. You must
create a letter template first (see Customize-Database-Letter
Template).
425 Commence cannot save the letter. Make sure you
have selected a valid directory for saving logged
letters using Edit-Preferences-Event Logs.
 
Check the directory specified for saving logged letters to make
sure it exists (see Edit-Preferences-Event Logs).
426 This view has been modified. You must save the
view in order to send letters to all items with a
formatted letter template.
 
When sending formatted letters to all items in the view, the view
being used to supply item information must be a saved view.
Save the view first (using Views-Save View, then select Send
Letter To All Items again.
429 One Item Per Region must be set for layouts that
contain multiple regions.
 
In the Region group box of the Add/Edit Paper Layout dialog box
you have specified multiple rows and/or columns to define
multiple regions. Check the One Item Per Region checkbox or
change the rows and columns to specify only one region.
431 This page layout is too <narrow/wide/short/tall>
for this type of view. Select a
<wider/narrower/shorter/taller> layout.
 
You are printing a view with the File-Print command. In the Print
<View> dialog box you selected a paper layout in the Paper drop-
down list box which is not wide enough to print this view. To
correct this problem, select a different paper layout in the Paper
drop-down list box or select Cancel and use the File-Page Setup
command to create a new paper layout.
433 Enter page width and height values greater than
zero.
 
The width and height of a page must be positive numbers.
434 You have not selected a printer. Choose 'Printer
Setup' from the File menu in order to print.
 
In order to proceed, a printer must be selected. Either a default
printer has not been chosen, or no printers or printer drivers have
been installed in the Windows environment. Select a default
printer for Commence using the File-Printer Setup. Use the
Windows Control Panel to install printers and printer drivers for all
Windows applications.
435 Enter region width and height values greater than
zero.
 
The width and height of a region must be positive numbers.
436 Reduce the internal margins to fit in the region
width and height.
 
The internal margins of a region in a page layout cannot be larger
that the width and height of the region.
437 Enter a number between 1 and 100 for the number
of copies.
 
You may make between 1 and 100 copies of this print request.
438 Enter a starting label number greater than zero.
 
You entered a negative value for the Starting Label field in the
Print Report dialog box. Enter the number of the label with which
to start printing. For example, for a three-column label form, the
fifth label is located in the second row, second column (counting
across the page from left to right, row by row).
439 Enter a 'To' date that is after the 'From' date.
 
The To date must not be earlier than the From date.
440 Enter valid dates for the 'From' and ‘To’ fields.
 
You must enter a valid date in the From and To fields. The date
must be in the form specified in the International dialog box in the
Windows Control Panel, or in a natural language format.
442 Commence will not begin printing. There is no way
to cancel the print job.
 
Commence was unable to provide a way to cancel the print job
and will not proceed with printing.
443 An error occurred while printing. Check the
printer.
 
Check the paper path for paper jams. Is the printer on-line? Is the
cable connected? Is the power on? Is the printer cable in the
correct port on your computer?
446 Reduce the page margins or region sizes to fit in
the page width and height.
 
The total of all regions on a page must fit within the margins of
the page.
447 This is the default page layout. It cannot be
deleted (change the default to a different page
layout before deleting this layout).
 
Commence allows you to define a default page layout to use
when printing. It is initially set to Letter (8.5 x 11 in.). You can
change the default using the Set Default button in File-Page
Setup.
448 Invalid label template or improper paper size.
Check the settings and try again.
 
Your printer settings may not be set to the appropriate orientation
and/or paper size for use with the selected label form. Select the
File-Page Setup command to make appropriate changes.
449 Could not locate at least one font with a size of 8,
10, or 12 points.
 
When printing a Day Planner Style, Commence searches for a
font with a size of 8, 10 or 12 points from one of the following font
families (as defined in Microsoft Windows):
MODERN Examples: Pica, Elite, Courier ROMAN Examples:
Times Roman, Century Schoolbook SWISS Examples:
Helvetica, Swiss
Commence searches for an 8 point font first.
450 There aren't enough lines with the available fonts
to print within the Commence margins. Reduce the
top or bottom margins to allow more space.
 
A Day Planner cannot be printed within the specified margins
using the available fonts. Change the top or bottom margins to
allow more space, or load smaller printer fonts into the Windows
environment, and try again. See File-Page Setup for setting
printer margins.
451 There is not enough disk space for print spooling.
 
There is not enough disk space for spooling print jobs. Delete
unwanted files, or increase the size of your disk.
2 The starting label number should be between 1 and
<number>.
 
You entered a number for the Starting Label field in the Print
Report dialog box that is outside the number of labels actually
printed on one page. Enter the number of the label with which to
start printing. For example, for a three-column label form, the fifth
label is located in the second row, second column (counting
across the page from left to right, row by row).
453 This view cannot print using One Item Per Region.
Change the layout template or print from a report
view.
 
You are printing a view with the File-Print command. In the Print
<View> dialog box you selected a paper layout in the Paper drop-
down list box which is has the One Item Per Region checkbox
checked. This type of view cannot print with this paper layout. To
correct this problem, select a different paper layout in the Paper
drop-down list box or select Cancel and use the File-Page Setup
command to create a new paper layout or change an existing
layout. Report views do allow printing with the One Item Per
Region option.
454 This view can only print in multiple regions using
One Item Per Region. Change the layout template.
 
You are printing a view with the File-Print command. In the Print
<View> dialog box you selected a paper layout in the Paper drop-
down list box which is has the One Item Per Region checkbox
unchecked. This type of view cannot print with this paper layout.
To correct this problem, select a different paper layout in the
Paper drop-down list box or select Cancel and use the File-Page
Setup command to create a new paper layout or change an
existing layout.
500 Select from the list first.
 
Make a selection from the list, or cancel the operation.
501 Enter a valid whole number.
 
Enter an integer value. Do not use decimal points.
502 Enter a whole number greater than zero.
 
Enter a non negative integer value. Do not use decimal points.
503 The End [Date or Time] cannot be sooner than the
Start [Date or Time].
 
You have entered an End Date or End Time that is before the
Start Date or Start Time. Correct one of the dates or times, and
try to save this item again.
504 COMMDLG.DLL returned error code <error code>.
Commence cannot continue the current operation.
 
Commence uses the Windows Common Dialogs to retrieve
certain types of information, such as file names and directory
paths. If the Common Dialog fails then Commence cannot
continue the current operation. Contact Technical Support for
assistance in resolving this error. (See Help-About)
505 Enter a valid file name.
 
Check the file name specified for proper DOS syntax.
506 A data conversion error was encountered while
processing '<database name>‘ (error code <error
code>). Data converter '<converter name>‘ cannot
continue.
 
Data from earlier versions of Commence must be converted to
work properly with the current version. The automatic data
conversion may not succeed if there are problems with the
original data. Contact Technical Support for assistance in
resolving this error. (See Help-About)
507 Data conversion initialization failed. Data
conversion cannot complete (initial database
version - final database version).
 
Data from earlier versions of Commence must be converted to
work properly with the
current version. The automatic data conversion may not succeed
if there are problems with the original data or if the required data
conversion modules are not found. Contact Technical Support for
assistance in resolving this error. (See Help-About)
508 The path entry must not be blank. Enter a valid
path specification or use the Select button to
locate one.
 
The path to the directory containing the administration files for the
Commence workgroup must be entered or selected using the
dialog displayed by pressing the Select button. Commence needs
this information to create or locate the directory.
509 Data converter [converter name] is an
incompatible version (expected: [version number],
actual: [version number]). Data conversion cannot
continue.
 
Data from earlier versions of Commence must be converted to
work properly with the
current version. The automatic data conversion may not succeed
if there are problems with the original data or if the required data
conversion modules are not found. Contact Technical Support for
assistance in resolving this error. (See Help-About)
510 Please enter a number between 1 and 30000,
inclusive.
 
Commence text fields can store from 1 to 30,000 characters.
Enter a value within this range.
511 The specified directory name does not exist.
Please enter a new directory name.
 
Commence could not find the directory on the disk. Use the
dialog box controls to find an existing directory (press F1 for help
while viewing the dialog box).
512 Directory '<directory name>' already exists.
 
The specified directory already exists. Use the dialog box controls
to create a new directory.
513 Cannot find file <filename>; check to ensure the
path and filename are correct.
 
Check the directory path and file name for proper DOS syntax.
514 An error was encountered while re-indexing
database <database name>. Commence will now
exit
515 Please enter a valid file extension before saving.
 
Follow normal DOS conventions when specifying a file extension
in Commence (up to
three characters, with no spaces).
 
516 Incorrect password. Try again or select Cancel.
 
The password you have entered is incorrect. In order to edit this
field or category, you must supply the proper password. Contact
the party responsible for locking the field or category for the
password.
517 The database <database name> is invalid. Please
select another database.
 
The database you selected cannot be used by Commence. Select
a different database (using the File-Open/Manage Database
command) or exit Commence.
518 The database <database name> is currently
locked. Either it is being accessed by another user
or was improperly closed. Please wait five minutes
or select another database.
 
The selected database is either: -- located on a Local Area
Network (LAN) drive and currently in use by another user, or --
located on a local drive and was improperly closed during the last
Commence session.
 
If the database is on a LAN drive, you must request that the
person using the database close it so that you can access it.
Otherwise, select another database to open.
 
If the database is on a local drive, exit Commence, wait five
minutes, and try again.
519 The Tutorial database is currently being accessed
by another copy of Commence. Tutorial mode is
not available.
 
Multiple copies of Commence cannot access the same database
at the same time. Another
copy of Commence is currently using the Tutorial database,
Tutorial mode is currently
unavailable.
520 The [Windows directory, Windows System
directory, Commence Program directory,
Commence Tutorial directory, root directory, DOS
directory] cannot be used; select another
directory.
 
Commence does not allow certain directories to be used in
specifying, for example, a database pathname. Select another
directory.
521 Cannot change to this Database. It no longer
exists. Create the directory or delete this database
entry.
 
The specified database no longer exists. Was this data copied
from another system? If so, make sure that all appropriate
directories were copied.
522 An error was encountered while converting
database '%s'. Commence will now exit.
 
523 Invalid or unrecognized database specified
(<database name>); Commence will now exit.
 
The /Database command line option was used with an
unrecognized or invalid database
name. Please check the database name and try again. The
database name is case sensitive.
524 Commence is unable to open the Database
because of low disk space. Free up at least
<space> on drive <drive> and try again.
 
Use the Windows Explorer or equivalent utility to free up some
disk space and try again.
525 The data in the specified database requires a
newer version of Commence to be used.
 
You are trying to use data from a newer version of Commence
with an earlier version of Commence. Use a more recent version
of Commence with the data.
526 Commence cannot find the Tutorial files. Tutorial
mode will not be available.
 
Commence cannot find its tutorial files or the tutorial configuration
information. Re-install
Commence (you will need to explicitly specify that tutorial files
should be
re-installed) or contact Technical Support for assistance in
resolving this error.
527 The tutorial.cmp file could not be found. New
tutorial data will not be loaded.
Commence cannot find the compressed tutorial data
(tutorial.cmp). If you are missing this file, it can be found on
Commence Installation Diskette 1, in gold\gold.cmp. Copy this
file to your Commence program directory, renaming it (as you
copy it) to tutorial.cmp. For example, if the Installation Diskette
is in drive A:, and your Commence program directory is in
c:\commence, you might enter this command from DOS: copy
a:\data\gold.cmp c:\commence\tutorial.cmp
You can also copy this file via Microsoft Windows File Manager
using the File-Copy command, or execute the Commence install
program.
528 The file <filename> contains nonprintable
characters and can not be pasted.
 
The file named in the error message may contain special control
characters that cannot be used in the field to which you are trying
to paste. Make sure the file is a plain ASCII text file (i.e., contains
no special control characters such as those used by word
processors to insert formatting characters) using the editor of
your choice.
529 Cannot paste the entire file. The file may be too
large to paste here.
 
Is the field large enough to hold the file you are trying to paste?
Commence may not be able to reserve enough memory to hold
the contents of the file. Close all unneeded applications, remove
any unneeded memory-resident programs and try again. You may
also try increasing the size of your Windows swap file (virtual
memory), or adding more memory to your system.
530 This item does not have a telephone number.
 
This item does not have a telephone number, so automatic
telephone dialing is not possible. Open a view or item detail that
has one or more telephone fields and try again.
531 You must select an item with a telephone number
before trying to dial.
 
Highlight an item that has a telephone number, and try again. If
necessary, open a view or item detail that has one or more
telephone fields.
532 There is no telephone number to dial.
 
There is no telephone number displayed in the active view, so
dialing is not possible. Use the Customize-Design View-Display
command to display telephone fields from the active category in
the view. If the category does not have any telephone fields
defined, open another view that does contain telephone fields or
add telephone fields to the category. Telephone fields must also
contain valid telephone numbers in order to use automatic dialing.
533 This type of window cannot be filtered/sorted.
 
Only views can be filtered/sorted.
534 This type of window does not have a layout.
 
Only views and item details can have a layout.
535 The sort order cannot be changed for this type of
window.
 
Only views and item details can have a sort order.
536 <Window name> windows cannot be printed.
 
You cannot print a letter template or an Add Item window.
537 '<database name>' is an unsupported version and
cannot be converted. Restore the original data
from backup and try again. If you are having
difficulty converting your data please contact
technical support for assistance. (<conversion
name>)
The database was created by an earlier version of Commence
but cannot be converted. Please contact Commence Technical
Support (select Help-About).
538 No windows are available for [sort, filter, layout,
print, tile, cascade].
 
You need to open a Commence view or detail window before
using this command. Use the View bar icons or the View menu to
open a view. Open a detail window by using the commands on
the Edit menu or the buttons on the tool bar. Open the window,
and try again.
539 Please enter a valid directory name before
proceeding.
540 The <database name> database is locked and
cannot be used with this version of Commence
543 There is nothing to delete.
 
There is no item selected, so there is nothing to delete. Open a
view (if necessary) and highlight an item to delete.
544 The '<field name>' field is full; additional data
cannot be pasted in.
 
The field already has its maximum amount of data. Additional
data cannot be pasted in.
545 The '<field name>' field is full; pasted data was
truncated.
 
The field is not large enough to accept all the pasted data. Some
of the pasted data has
been lost.
546 The view '<view name>' is filtered by the User
Item. The User Item is not defined. Use Edit-
Preferences-Personal Info to define it.
 
A view definition exists which is filtered for items connected to (-
Me-). Commence cannot resolve the reference to (-Me-) because
you did not select an item for yourself using the Edit-Preferences-
Personal Info command.
547 Commence Internal Error.
 
Contact Commence Technical Support and report this message
(select Help-About).
548 Commence cannot dial a phone number in a
connected field.
 
Connected fields are not supported for automatic dialing
purposes. To dial a phone number in a connected field, open the
item detail of the connected item or a view displaying the
connected item. Then dial the phone number again (select Tools-
Dial Phone).
549 The data in <database> is from an earlier version
of Commence and cannot be used with this
version of Commence. The data can be converted
to work properly with this version of Commence,
contact your vendor or technical support for
information
550 There is not enough memory available for this
operation.
 
Commence could not reserve enough memory to complete a
task. Close all unneeded applications, remove any unneeded
memory-resident programs and try again. You may also try
increasing the size of your Windows swap file (virtual memory), or
adding more memory to your system.
571 Commence cannot obtain a system timer.
Commence will now exit.
 
Commence was not able to obtain a system timer, so Commence
will not know when to advance to the next day. For example, after
midnight, all calendar views will still display today's date. You may
have too many open applications that require a system timer.
Close one or more of these applications and try to run Commence
again.
575 Close a window. There are too many open
windows.
 
You must close one or more of your Commence windows before
you can open this window. Select a window and press CTRL-F4.
576 You need to select a printer in order for printer
fonts to be available.
 
Choose a printer by selecting File-Printer Setup from the menu
bar.
577 Select an item from the Font Name list.
 
You must make a selection from the Font Name list before you
can continue.
578 Select or enter a valid font size greater than 0
points and no more than 255 points.
 
Commence limits the font size selection to 255 points regardless
of the scaleable font software that is in use.
579 Windows Telephony services have been disabled,
dialing is not available.
 
Check via the Windows Control Panel that Telephony is properly
set up.
580 The Windows Telephony driver encountered an
error. Commence cannot continue dialing.
 
A low-level TAPI error was encountered and Commence cannot
continue dialing. Check the TAPI configuration by using the
Windows Control Panel Telephony applet. You can also test TAPI
by using the Dialer application (dialer.exe) that is installed with
TAPI. If problems persist, contact Technical Support for
assistance in resolving this error.
581 This image was stored under Windows for Pens,
and cannot be read with this version of Windows.
Use Windows for Pens to display the image.
 
If you create an image file under Windows for Pen Computing,
you should run the same version of Windows when trying to use
the image in Commence.
582 This image was stored under a newer version of
Windows, and cannot be read with this version of
Windows. Use the new version of Windows to
display the image.
 
If you create an image file under Windows version 3.x, you should
run the same version of Windows when trying to use the image in
Commence.
583 This image was stored under an older version of
Windows, and cannot be read with this version of
Windows.
 
If you create an image file under an older version of Windows you
should run the same version of Windows when trying to use the
image in Commence.
584 There is not enough memory to perform spell
checking.
 
Commence could not reserve enough memory to perform spell-
checking. Close all unneeded applications, remove any unneeded
memory-resident programs and try again. You may also try
increasing the size of your Windows swap file (virtual memory), or
adding more memory to your system. See you Windows and
computer hardware documentation.
590 There is no [Extensions] information in WIN.INI for
file '<file name>'.
 
Commence could not find the file's extension in the [Extensions]
section of your win.ini file. Commence needs this information in
order to launch the application that is appropriate for the data file.
Add the file extension to win.ini and try again. See your Windows
documentation for information on adding file extension
associations to win.ini.
594 Commence cannot find the configuration data in
COMMENCE.INI. Commence will now exit.
 
The configuration data in COMMENCE.INI cannot be found.
Either Commence was not installed properly or the information
was deleted. Re-install Commence. If problems persist, contact
Technical Support for assistance in resolving this error (see Help-
About).
595 The database information in DATABASE.INI is
missing or invalid. Commence will now exit.
 
596 Windows Telephony is not installed or is
configured improperly. Use the Control Panel
Telephone applet to configure. Commence cannot
continue dialing.
 
Commence uses the Windows TAPI system to dial phone
numbers. Make sure TAPI is configured properly by running the
Windows Control Panel Telephony applet. (Commence can start
the Control Panel for you, go to Edit-Preferences-Dialer.) You can
also test TAPI by using the Dialer application (dialer.exe) that is
installed with TAPI. If problems persist, contact Technical Support
for assistance in resolving this error (see Help-About).
597 Commence is unable to start application for
'<application name>'. (Windows returned error
code <error code>.)
 
A Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) error has occurred when
Commence requested Windows to start the application noted in
the message.
598 Windows Telephony is not available with this
version of Windows
 
You are using a version of Windows that does not
support Telephony. You will not be able to dial
from within Commence.
600 <item>: Not <action>.
 
An error occurred, and Commence could not perform the add. Is
there enough disk space? If you suspect disk problems, run
diagnostic utilities to isolate any problems before trying again.
Some common diagnostic utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0
and later), and CHKDSK.
606 Unable to open '<filename>'.
 
An error occurred, and Commence could not open the specified
file. Check the amount of free space on the disk. If you suspect
disk failure, run diagnostic utilities and/or have your disk drive
serviced before you continue. Some common diagnostic utilities
include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK. If the
problem persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select
Help-About).
607 Unable to open ‘<filename>’. The disk currently in
drive ‘<drive letter>’ might be disk number
‘<number>
 
Commence cannot open the listed file. You may have the
incorrect diskette in the diskette drive.
611 Unable to create '<directory name/filename>'.
 
Check the amount of free space on the disk. Is the drive door
closed? If you suspect disk failure, run diagnostic utilities and/or
have your disk drive serviced before you continue. Some
common diagnostic utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and
later), and CHKDSK.
612 '<directory name>' is an invalid directory name.
 
e directory name could not be created; please check the
name you have entered and try again.
3 Unable to read '<filename>'.
 
A disk error occurred while trying to read the specified file. If you
suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any
problems before trying again. Some common diagnostic utilities
include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
623 Unable to write ‘<filename>‘.
 
An error occurred when Commence tried to write information to
the disk. Is there enough free space on the destination disk? If
you suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate
any problems before trying again. Some common diagnostic
utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
633 There is no image to copy to a file.
 
The image field must contain an image before using this
command. Use the Edit-Paste
command to copy an image into the field.
634 There is a disk error. Commence cannot copy the
image to a file.
 
A disk error occurred while trying to write an image to a file. Is
there enough free space on the disk? If you suspect disk or file
problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any problems before
trying again.
635 This type of image cannot be copied to a file.
 
Commence doesn't support writing this type of image to a file.
Use the clipboard commands on the Edit menu to copy the image
to the clipboard, where it can be accessed by other applications.
636 Commence cannot continue importing due to an
error; please check the available disk space.
 
A disk error occurred while trying to write an image to a file. Is
there enough free space on the disk? If you suspect disk or file
problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any problems before
trying again. Some common diagnostic utilities include
SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
637 Commence cannot continue importing because of
a disk error on the file <filename>.
 
A disk error occurred while trying to access the import file. If you
suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any
problems before trying again. Some common diagnostic utilities
include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
638 There is a disk error on the file '<filename>'.
Commence cannot continue exporting.
 
Is there enough space on the destination disk for the export? If
you suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate
any problems before trying again. Some common diagnostic
utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
 
Caution: Remember that the export file named in the message is
incomplete.
639 Unable to delete ‘<directory name/filename>‘.
 
An error occurred, and Commence could not delete the specified
directory or file name.
640 There is a disk error. Commece RM cannot copy
the view to the HTML file.
 
Is there enough space on the destination disk for the export?
Make sure the destination directory and drive are available. If
saving to a diskette, confirm that a disk is in the drive. If you
suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate any
problems before trying again. Some common diagnostic utilities
include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
 
Caution: The HTML file was not created. Retry the operation.
643 Commence cannot find the file '<filename>' on the
disk.
 
Be sure that the file exists on the disk. Check the file name for
proper DOS syntax, and try again.
644 Commence cannot load the file '<filename>'. It or
one of its components was not found on the disk.
 
A disk error occurred while trying to load the file or one of its
components. Be sure that the file exists where it is expected. If
you suspect disk or file problems, run diagnostic utilities to isolate
any problems before trying again. Some common diagnostic
utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later), and CHKDSK.
645 Commence cannot load the program '<program
name>'. Be sure that it is installed correctly.
 
Commence cannot load the application. Be sure that you have
properly installed the program as a Microsoft Windows
application.
646 Insufficient disk space on drive %s to complete
this operation. Free up at least <number> bytes of
disk space and try again.
 
You chose an operation where Commence will need to create
new files and disk space on the drive mentioned is getting too low
to safely work with the active database.
 
Commence creates temporary files while processing certain
definition modification requests. When the process is complete,
Commence will remove the original files and make the temporary
files permanent. This is the safest method of expanding your
database, but it will temporarily cause a need for additional disk
space. To correct this problem, free up a sufficient amount of disk
space before you continue to use the database.
647 Warning: Data disk space is below <size>. To
reclaim disk space, delete or archive any unused
categories or remove any non-Commence files
from your <drive letter> disk drive.
 
Disk space is getting too low to safely work with the active
database. Free up as much space as possible before you
continue to use the database. Either use the File-Export-By
Category command to archive categories, or delete categories
(using the Customize-Database-Category command) that you no
longer use.
648 Commence was unable to delete the directory
'<directory name>'.
 
An error occurred, and Commence could not delete the specified
directory.
649 Commence cannot access the directory
'<directory name>'.
 
An error occurred, and Commence could not access the specified
directory.
650 The directory '<directory name>' is empty or no
longer exists.
 
Was the directory accidentally deleted or emptied? Create the
directory using DOS commands, the Windows File Manager, or
some other utility; or, restore data into the directory using File-
Import or the Restore button on the Open/Manage Database
dialog box.
651 Unexpected end of file on input file '<filename>'.
 
The file does not contain any data. The file may be zero bytes in
size. Please recreate the file.
652 The input file '<filename>' is an invalid file type.
 
The file selected for the File-Sync Link In command is not a
Commence update file. Check the filename and select a different
file.
653 The input sync file '<filename>' is invalid for the
current database.
 
Each update file is created for a specific database. If you attempt
to use the File-Sync Link In command with a file for a different
database, Commence will not perform the Sync Link In. You have
selected the wrong database or the wrong update file.
660 Spell-checker Error - Word Not Found
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
661 Spell-checker Error - No Data Available
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
662 Spell-checker Error - No Aid Available
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
663 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Word Construction
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
664 Spell-checker Error - Too Many Dictionaries Open
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
665 Spell-checker Error - Dictionary is Not Updateable
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
666 Spell-checker Error - Updateable Dictionary Full
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
667 Spell-checker Error - Duplicate Dictionary
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
668 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Dictionary Name
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
669 Spell-checker Error - Bad Dictionary
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
670 Spell-checker Error - LEXAM Not Initialized
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
671 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Function
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
672 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Token in Dictionary
List
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
673 Spell-checker Error - Invalid Word
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
674 Spell-checker Error - Illegal Input Flag
Combination
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
675 Spell-checker Error - Missing or Illegal Value in
Parameter Area
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
676 Spell-checker Error - Passback Too Small
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
677 Spell-checker Error - Filename Not Allowed for
Updateable Dictionary
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
678 Spell-checker Error - Illegal Number of
Dictionaries
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
679 Spell-checker Error - LEXAM Busy
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
680 Spell-checker Error - Memory Allocation Error
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
681 Spell-checker Error - File Not Found
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
682 Spell-checker Error - Path Not Found
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
683 Spell-checker Error - File Open Failed
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
684 Spell-checker Error - File Access Denied
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
685 Spell-checker Error - File Sharing Violation
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
686 Spell-checker Error - General File I/O Error
 
An internal spell checker error occurred. Try again. If the problem
persists, contact Commence Technical Support (select Help-
About).
690 No spelling mistakes were found.
 
The spell checker did not find any spelling mistakes. Select Yes
to continue.
691 The spell-checker cannot locate the spelling
dictionary, <dictionary name>.
 
Commence cannot find the named dictionary. Make sure that the
dictionary file has not been deleted, renamed, or damaged. The
Commence dictionary is installed in the program directory
selected during installation (usually this is c:\commence) If all
else fails, you can re-install the Commence dictionary from the
installation diskettes. The dictionary file name is LOCAL.DIC.
 
A personal dictionary (called local.dic) that is specific to the open
database may exist in the open database's directory (see File-
Open/Manage Database).
692 There was a system error in the spell-checker.
 
A system error occurred when trying to use the spell checker. Try
again. If the problem persists, contact Commence Technical
Support (select Help-About).
693 You may spell check only text fields.
 
Only text fields may be checked for spelling errors.
800 Could not send e-mail, no mail programs are
available. Select Edit-Preferences-Other Apps to
add e-mail information.
 
You must tell Commence what mail protocol you are using (CMC,
VIM, or MAPI). Go to Edit-Preferences-Other Apps and select E-
Mail client. From here you can select the protocol, login name,
password and other information specific to the protocol used.
801 E-mail services are not available; JJMAIL32.DLL
not found or wrong version.
 
You should have a JJMAIL32.DLL file in your Commence program
directory. If one cannot be found, re-install Commence.
802 Could not send e-mail. An error occurred while
interacting with your e-mail program.
 
Commence could not send the E-Mail message. Please check
your E-Mail Client settings in Edit-Preferences-Other Apps-E-Mail
Client. Make sure you login name and passwords are correct.
Also, double check that you can send e-mail outside of
Commence.
803 No web browser detected. Please install an
Internet browser program and try again.
 
Commence checks your registry for the default Internet browser.
None was found.
804 Could not launch web browser. An error occurred
while interacting with your browser program.
 
Commence attempted to open your default Internet browser but
had difficulties. Make sure you can start your browser outside of
Commence.
805 An error occurred during synchronization with
Outlook. Check the Message Log for more
information.
 
The synchronization with Outlook did not complete successfully. If
you selected Tools-Outlook Sync from the menu, more
information about the error can be found by selecting Help-
Message Log from Commence. When using an agent to
synchronize with Outlook, more information can be found in the
ACTIVE.LOG file located in the data directory. If the log file does
not contain sufficient information , close Commence and restart
using a command line option of /TRACE.
 
Confirm that all required fields contain data. The name field in
particular cannot be left blank. Review the section titled “Prepare
your Applications” in the Outlook Integration User’s Guide to
make sure that the data being synchronized meets all the
guidelines.
806 Synchronization with Outlook was cancelled.
 
Commence was unable to continue because the operation was
cancelled by the user.
807 Microsoft Outlook could not be loaded; verify that
the required version of Outlook is installed.
 
Outlook must be installed on the same PC as Commence.
Review the section titled “Requirements” in the Outlook
Integration User’s Guide for more information.
808 Could not logon to Microsoft Outlook; verify that
your email preferences are set correctly.
 
Commence was unable to login to Outlook. Make sure you have
configured your e-mail preferences correctly. Review the section
titled “Set E-Mail Client Preferences” in the Outlook Integration
User’s Guide for more information.
809 The Outlook integration services could not be
loaded.
 
A problem was encountered while loading the program files
necessary for synchronizing Commence with Outlook. Try
reinstalling Commence.
810 The Outlook preferences should be
configured
using the Preferences-Other Apps dialog before using this
command.
The Tools-Outlook Sync command cannot be used until after the
Outlook Calendar or Outlook Contacts
preferences have been configured. See “Outlook Field Mappings”
in the Outlook Integration User’s Guide
for a list of required fields that must be mapped.
 
920 View '<view name>' cannot use color code '<color
template name>' (wrong category).
 
Views and Color templates are set for a particular category. The
category of the view being transferred in is different than the
category of the color code template selected for the view.
921 Transfer error: <error condition>
The indicated problem was encountered which prevented the
transfer command from completing successfully. Transfer
problems are usually due to insufficient memory or disk space on
the current drive or in the temporary directory indicated by the
TEMP= environment variable. Verify that you have enough
available memory and disk space and try this command again.
In order to check the integrity of a database, do the following:
Turn on trace by appending a command line option of /Trace to
the Commence icon.
1. Perform a File-Transfer Out. Press both 'Select All' buttons,
and check the box to also transfer items. Send this to a file called
"Test".
2. Go to File-Open/Manage Database-Add a new database,
typing in "Test" into the Name and Path boxes.
3. Open this database, then perform a Transfer in of the "Test"
file. (Warning: Do NOT transfer into the original database.) If no
errors are detected during either the transfer Out or In process,
then the database is probably OK.
Otherwise, check the active.log file in the data directory to see
what Commence was attempting to process before the error
occurred.
1016 This database is not empty and may not be used
as a remote database.
 
You have selected the File-Sync Link In command, and specified
an update file (*.SNC) which contains an initial synchronization
information. An initial update file contains special commands that
will change the open database to a remote database when it is
processed, and it requires that the open database be empty.
 
Commence will not perform a Sync Link In because the open
database is not empty. To correct this, select the File-
Open/Manage Database command to open another database or
create a new database with the File-Open/Manage Database
command and then retry the Sync Link In command.
1030 The remote database must have a unique name.
 
You are defining a remote database in the Add/Edit Remote
Database dialog box and you have not entered a name or the
name that you entered is a duplicate of an existing remote
database. To correct this problem, enter a different name in the
Database Name text box and select the OK button or select the
Cancel button to return to the Sync Out dialog box.
1031 A remote database must be selected; if a remote
database is not defined, use the Add button to
create one.
 
You have selected the OK button in the Sync Out dialog box to
create an update file and you have not selected a remote
database name from the Synchronize with Database drop-down
list box. If no names appear in the Synchronize with Database
drop-down list box. select the Add button to create a remote
database name.
 
Select the OK button to create an update file for the selected
remote database or select the Cancel button to return to the work
area.
1036 SyncLink error: <error>.
 
Accessing admin files failed
Make sure the base database contains all the appropriate
administration files. These filenames will all have .DAT
extensions. The date and size of these files should match
those found in the Workgroup Administration Files directory
(e.g. \wgfiles5) on the Server.
To ensure that none of your changes are lost, you must
perform a complete sync link out from the base database,
then retry the sync link in at the remote database.
Canceled by user
This message is to inform you that the sync link was
canceled at your request.
Insufficient permissions
Contact your Commence Administrator. The permissions you
have been granted do not allow you to perform this
operation. Only the administrator can modify your
permissions to give you the required access.
Importing item data failed
The data you are attempting to import may be corrupt. At the
source database where you produced the sync file, test the
data by selecting File-Transfer Out. Transfer all categories,
agents, and item out to a file and take note of any error
messages. Contact Technical Support if the Transfer fails.
Invalid sync id found in the database
Please contact Jensen-Jones Sales to obtain the latest
version of Commence.
File could not be accessed
If your sync file is located on a shared drive, check to ensure
that the sync file is not being accessed by another user or
another copy of Commence. Make sure you have the correct
read/write permissions to the drive where the sync file is
located.
Disk read failed
The sync link file could not be read because of a disk error. If
you suspect disk failure, run diagnostic utilities. Some
common diagnostic utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0
and later), and CHKDSK. To ensure that none of your
changes are lost, you must perform a complete sync link out
from the base database, then retry the sync link in at the
remote database.
Disk write failed
The sync link file could not be created either because of a
disk error or a lack of disk space. Make sure you have at
least 2-3 times the size of the uncompressed database in
free disk space. If you suspect disk failure, run diagnostic
utilities.
Disk access failed
If you suspect disk failure, run diagnostic utilities.
Out of memory
Select Help-System Information in Commence. Take note of
the amount of total free memory available. If your system
resources are low (below 50%) close down any other
applications and try again. Also try increasing the size of
your swap file using Control Panel-386 Enhanced-Virtual
Memory. Restart Windows and try again.
A maximum was exceeded
Check Appendix A in the Commence User’s Guide for a list of
the maximum capacities allowed for items, fields, views, etc.
The information you are attempting to sync link in would
cause Commence to exceed one of those maximum
capacities.
Incorrect internal state. Please call Tech Support
Contact Technical Support (at the phone number listed in
Help-About). Take note of what you were doing at the time
the error occurred.
Database access failed
Test the data by selecting File-Transfer Out. Transfer all
categories, agents, and item out to a file and take note of any
error messages. Then try transferring in from the .TFR file.
Contact Technical Support if either the Transfer In or Out
fails.
An invalid parameter was found
Contact Technical Support (at the phone number listed in
Help-About) for more information.
A required record was not found
The sync link in could not be completed because a required
item is missing. One or more of your database definitions
(connections, views, detail forms, agents etc.) views, is
filtered by a connection to a particular item in the database.
That connected item either cannot be created or does not
exist.
If you are performing an initial sync link in, return to the base
database and remove the dependency on this item. For
example, if you have filtered a connection, select Customize-
Database-Connection and edit that connection. Press the
Advanced button. Press the Select Filter button, then press
Clear Filter, and Save. Then perform an incremental sync
link out using a new sync link group.
A duplicate record was found
The information you are attempting to sync link in would
cause a duplicate item to be added to a category. If duplicate
items are not allowed in any of your categories, you should
change this setting by selecting Customize-Database-
Category. Edit the category and turn on the Allow Duplicate
Names checkbox.
Internal error. Please call Tech Support
Contact Technical Support (at the phone number listed in
Help-About). Take note of what you were doing at the time
the error occurred.
Unknown error. Please call Tech Support
Contact Technical Support (at the phone number listed in
Help-About). Take note of what you were doing at the time
the error occurred.
1037 SyncLink error: disk write to output file or
temporary directory failed.
 
Commence was unable to save the sync link file. This error is
usually due to insufficient memory or disk space on the current
drive or in the temporary directory indicated by the TEMP=
environment variable. To determine where your temporary
directory is located, type SET at the DOS prompt and hit ENTER.
Take note of the path specified after TEMP= or TMP=. Then verify
that you have enough available disk space on that drive and try
this command again. To perform a sync link in, make sure you
have at least 10-15 times the size of the compressed .SNC file in
free space in your temporary directory.
 
To perform a sync link out, make sure you have at least 2-3 times
the size of the uncompressed database in free disk space.
1038 SyncLink error: reading or writing the database
data files failed.
 
An error occurred and Commence could not process the data.
Check the amount of free space on the disk. If you suspect
disk failure, run diagnostic utilities and/or have your disk
drive serviced before you continue. Some common
diagnostic utilities include SCANDISK (DOS 6.0 and later),
and CHKDSK. If the problem persists, contact Commence
Technical Support (select Help-About).
1039 SyncLink error: this stand-alone database must
be used with a SyncLink file containing an initial
sync.
 
The only way to create a sync file containing an initial sync is by
adding a new Sync Link group at the base database. For detailed
steps on how to establish a new sync link group for the first time,
see the File-Sync Link Out command.
 
Once you have added a new sync link group, then perform an
incremental sync link out with that remote database.
1043 An error was encountered while initializing the
database for SyncLink. SyncLink cannot continue
1000 Couldn't make items shared.
 
You selected the Edit-Share All Items command and Commence
can not create shared items in a category which is not shared.
1001 Shared categories with local fields are not
allowed in this version of Commence.
Commence does not allow you to add local fields to a shared
category.
If you are trying to display a private field, you may add a local
category to the database then add a connection from the shared
category to the local category. Note that a local form will also
need to be created for the shared category; connections to local
categories cannot be displayed on shared forms.
To add a category, use the Customize-Database-Category
command. To add a connection, use the Customize-Database-
Connection command. To copy a detail form, use the Customize-
Database-Detail Form command and click the Copy button.
To add a category, use the Tools-Customize-Database-Category
command. To add a connection, use the Tools-Customize-
Database-Connection command. To copy a detail form, use the
Tools-Customize-Database-Detail Form command and click the
Copy button.
1002 You have marked the field <fieldname> as shared
but the category is not shared. No fields in a non-
shared category may be shared.
 
Commence cannot save the shared field definition because the
category is a local category. Only local fields can be added to
local categories.
1003 This database cannot create remote databases
because it is not a base database.
 
A database which is itself a remote database cannot create other
remote databases for SyncLinking. Only the base database may
add new remote databases.
1004 This stand-alone database cannot be used with
SyncLink; create a remote database in order to
use SyncLink.
 
A SyncLink is not allowed into or out of a stand-alone database.
The only exception to this rule is an initial SyncLink into an new,
empty, stand-alone database.
1010 The permissions you have been granted do not
allow this operation.
 
Your access to the shared database is controlled by a set of user
permissions. You have selected an action that is not allowed for
your user level. Check with the Commence Administrator if you
think your permissions should be changed.
1011 The permissions you have been granted do not
allow you to add this shared <data or definition>.
 
You have chosen to add a shared item or a definition. Your
permissions do not allow you to save this item or definition as
shared. You may be able to save the item or definition as a local
item or definition. Check with the Commence Administrator if you
think your permissions should be changed.
1012 The permissions you have been granted do not
allow you to edit this shared <data or definition>.
 
Your permissions do not allow you to save this item or definition
as shared. Check with the Commence Administrator if you think
your permissions should be changed.
1013 The permissions you have been granted do not
allow you to delete this shared <data or
definition>.
 
Your permissions do not allow you to delete this shared item or
definition. Check with the Commence Administrator if you think
your category and/or database permissions should be changed.
1015 The permissions you have been granted do not
allow you to overwrite this shared <view name>.
 
You have chosen to save a view with the Views-Save View As
command, and the name you have selected matches an existing,
shared view's name. You do not have permission to overwrite the
existing shared view. You can save the view with another
name.Otherwise contact the Commence Administrator and
request that your permissions be changed to Author level.
1017 The Login ID field is required for a valid login.
 
You must enter a User name in the Log In to Server dialog box
before selecting OK. Commence can not log in to a server
without this Login ID.
1018 An error occurred accessing the Administration
library.
Commence could not access one of the server program files,
ADMINENG.DLL. This file should exist in your Commence
program directory. Make sure you only have one copy of this file
in the Commence Program directory. to locate the program
directory, look at the properties of your Commence shortcut. On
the Shortcut tab, the target should point to the Commence
program directory. Perform the following steps to confirm that the
Windows registry points to the correct program directory.
Check the online Commence knowledgebase for more
information about this error.
1019 Login was not successful. Try again or select
Cancel.
 
Commence could not login to the server because a wrong
password was entered. Enter the correct password to continue or
select Cancel to terminate the Login process.
1020 The permissions you have been granted do not
allow you to access this database.
 
You have not been given permission to access this shared
database. Check with the Commence Administrator if you think
your permissions should be changed.
1021 The Admin directory could not be located or does
not contain the proper admin files.
The Commence Server will not start because it could find the
necessary Administration files.
Check the WGFILES7= stick in the ADMIN.INI file in the program
directory. The path must point to the Workgroup Administration
files (*.DAT) on the Server.
Then look at the properties for your Commence shortcut. On the
Shortcut tab, the target should point to the Commence program
directory. Confirm that the Windows registry points to the correct
program directory. Contact Technical Support for additional
assistance.
 
1024 This version of Commence requires a different
version of the Administration library.
 
The version of the Commence program file (ADMINENG.DLL) for
the Commence Administration library is not the proper version. .
If multiple copies of Commence are installed, make sure you
are running the correct shortcut. Check the shortcut
properties to make sure program directory and path to
commence.exe are correct.
Restart windows to get fresh copy of ADMINENG.DLL into
memory.
Select Customize-Workgroup, then press Next to view the
Communication settings. Make sure shared LAN directory is
available and that the path is set correctly.
Check network permissions to the shared LAN directory.
Clients must have FULL (read/write/create/delete/modify)
permissions. Copy a small text file from the client to the
shared LAN directory. Be sure you can edit, save, and delete
the file.
Run ComAdmin and check list of users, databases, etc. to
make sure they appear intact.
Right click on commence.exe and admineng.dll. Make sure
the versions are correct.
Reinstall Commence
1025 An error occurred while using this database with
the Administration library.
 
A system error occurred when trying to access the Administration
Library. This error is caused by:
problems initializing the admineng.dll
problems initializing the communication settings for a
particular database
 
Close Windows and restart Commence with the /PROMPT
command line option. When you are prompted for which
database to open, try opening a personal database first, then
retry opening the workgroup database.
Restart windows to get fresh copy of ADMINENG.DLL into
memory
Select Customize-Workgroup, then press Next to view the
Communication settings. Make sure shared LAN directory is
available and that the path is set correctly.
Check network permissions to the shared LAN directory.
Clients must have FULL (read/write/create/delete/modify)
permissions. Copy a small text file from the client to the
shared LAN directory. Be sure you can edit, save, and delete
the file.
Check the database.id file. Either delete that file at the server
and reconfigure the Communication settings, or try pointing
to new shared LAN directory. In both cases, the database.id
file will be recreated.
Check the *.DAT files in the \wgfiles5 directory. One of these
files may be corrupt, or abnormally large (e.g., over 100Mb),
or unusually small (under 1kb). Run ComAdmin and check
list of users, databases, etc. to make sure they are intact.
Replace any suspicious DAT files with the equivalent file from
any client data directory.
Check the DATA.ini file on Commence server. Take note of
the SharedDbID=? Note that this number will be in decimal
format, not hexadecimal. Compare with databases defined in
ComAdmin, especially if a new shared database was recently
added. Note that the *.DAT filenames will be in hexadecimal.
Don't forget to convert. (e.g. sharedDbID=20 matches up with
auth0014.dat)
Database was not properly administered. Run ComAdmin.
Remove the database from the shared database list, then re-
add it. Re-enroll all users.
 
If the problem persists, reinstall Commence.
1026 The server has failed to respond to the sync
request; check that the server is running.
 
Commence did not receive a response from the server when
requesting a database synchronization. The system may be busy
or the server may be unavailable. Try again later or check with
the Commence Administrator to see if there is a server problem.
1027 The database is not connected to the server and
automatic syncing will be disabled.
 
Commence could not access the shared LAN directory when
requesting a database synchronization. Automatic
synchronization will not occur until the problem is corrected.
Check that the Commence Server is running. Also make sure that
the client can access the shared LAN directory with full
permissions. .
 
If you have turned off syncing, use the Customize-Workgroup
command to reset your synchronization preferences.
1028 This database is enrolled for a different user;
select a different data directory or enter a different
login name.
 
The User name you entered in the Log In to Server dialog box
was setup for a different client database. Commence can not log
in to the server for this Login ID with the open database. To
correct the problem, enter a different Login ID or use the File-
Open/Manage Database command to open a different database.
1029 An error occurred while registering this client.
Check the Message Log for additional information.
 
The Commence Administrator’s attempt to register this client to
the shared database was unsuccessful. Select Help-Message
Log for more information about what error occurred.
 
To re-register this client, the Commence Administrator must select
the Customize-Workgroup command from the Commence Server
PC. Select the Next > button until you get to the Register screen.
Press the Remove button to remove the user’s name from the list
of Registered Users. Then try registering the user again.
 
Tips:
Delete any files found in the server's workgrp directory
If syncing via MS Exchange or Outlook, confirm that the
Profile name is correct. Enter it case-sensitively
Do not use blank password for e-mail syncing.
1032 The Login ID was not found. It may have been
deleted, or it does not exist.
 
Upon opening the shared database, you entered a Login ID which
was not valid. The ComAdmin program did not find this login ID in
its records. It is possible that the user record never existed, or it
has since been deleted. Once a user is deleted, only the
Administrator can login to the shared database belonging to that
user.
1033 The automatic login failed; please enter login
name and password.
 
You have selected auto-login in the Other Preferences dialog box.
Commence attempted to log in, but the login has failed. Your
Login ID may be invalid or may have been deleted.
 
Restart Windows. Make sure the CAPS LOCK key is not on and
try again. Check with the Commence Administrator if you can not
determine the cause of problem.
1034 The Commence server license is not valid for the
number of users defined in ComAdmin. Please use
the License utility to update Commence with a
valid license that authorizes <number> users.
 
When Commence launches, several checks are performed to
ensure that the number of clients using the software does not
exceed the total user limit. First confirm that you have purchased
a sufficient number of Commence clients (one per user). Then run
License and check the User Limit. Re-enter your key if necessary
to increase the total user limit. If the key does not produce the
desired User Limit, contact Commence Sales to obtain a new key
or to purchase additional client software.
 
This error may also be caused during an upgrade from a prior
version of Commence. If, for example, you owned 10 client
licenses in a previous version but only upgraded 7 client licenses,
then you must remove the additional 3 users before running
Commence. Select the Users icon in ComAdmin to delete the
extra users.
1042 Commence has detected an invalid file type
during syncing; use Transfer Out and In to a new
database to correct this problem.
This database contains information which Commence cannot
recognize. It is possible that a file has been damaged.
If the database is a Commence Server database, then restore
from a backup of the database. If a recent backup is not
available, you can salvage your data by transferring out all
categories and agents, including items. Then add a new, empty
database using the File-Open/Manage Database command. Open
the new database and use File-Transfer In to rebuild your
database. See Getting Started for more information about how to
set up your new database as a shared database.
If you are a client, you should re-enroll. See the section titled
‘How to Enroll into a Commence Workgroup’ in the Commence
User’s Guide for detailed instructions.
1050 A workgroup error has occurred. ADMINENG.DLL
returned error code <error code>.
 
Check your communication settings using the Customize-
Workgroup command.
 
If the problems persist, take note of the exact error message,
including the error code number, and contact Commence
Technical Support. Select Help-About for the Technical Support
phone number.
1051 <Key> is not a valid authorization key. Enter the
key exactly as it appears on your instruction
sheet. There should be no spaces or punctuations.
 
The authorization key you have entered is not correct. Press the
CAPS LOCK key on your keyboard (to toggle CAPS LOCK on or
off) and try entering the key again.
 
If you do not have an authorization key, contact the Commence
Administrator. At the server, make sure that the client is
registered. You can verify the authorization key by selecting the
Customize-Workgroup command at the server and going to the
Register screen. Highlight the registered user and then select the
Details button.
1052 Template file for the client instruction sheet was
not found <s?>. Instruction sheet cannot be
generated.
As part of the registration process Commence can generate an
instruction sheet that walks a user through the client enroll
process. The instruction sheet is saved as a text file you can print
out, e-mail or fax to the user.
This instruction sheet is generated from a template file that you
should customize to include information about your site. At a
minimum, you should add your name and phone number so that
users can contact you if they experience any problems. The
template file is a text file that you can edit using any text editor
(such as Notepad or WordPad).
There are two template files, one for e-mail and one for a shared
LAN directory:
x:\commence\wgfiles5\steps1.txt is the e-mail template
file, and x:\commence\wgfiles5\steps2.txt is the shared
LAN template file, (where x:\commence is the Commence
program directory).
1053 Server communication parameters not found.
Please configure the server using the Customize-
Workgroup command.
 
At the Commence Server PC, select the Customize-Workgroup
command. Select the Next > button until you get to the
Communications screen. To modify the communication settings
for the Commence Server, press the Configure button on the top
half of the screen.
1054 Commence cannot run while a copy of the
Commence Administration program is active. Shut
down ComAdmin before starting Commence.
 
You must close ComAdmin to save any changes to the
Workgroup Administration files. Commence cannot access that
information while ComAdmin is running. To shut down
ComAdmin, switch over to that application and select File-Exit
from the menu.
1055 The workgroup admin files are currently locked
either by ComAdmin or another copy of
Commence. Try again later.
 
The same Workgroup Administration files (*.DAT files in the
\wgfiles5 directory) are shared by Commence and ComAdmin.
Commence cannot access that information while ComAdmin is
running, and vice versa. Make sure all Server databases in
Commence are closed before attempting to change settings in
ComAdmin. Likewise, make sure ComAdmin is closed before
attempting to change workgroup settings in Commence. Select
File-Exit from the menu to close either application.
1056 Could not find the database registration
information from the server. Verify that your
communication parameters are entered correctly.
If problems persist, contact your Commence
administrator to:
1) verify that your instruction sheet is up-to-date,
and,
2) arrange for the server to re-send the registration
information.
 
Check your communication settings using the Customize-
Workgroup command. Use the instruction sheet provided by your
Commence Administrator to make sure any paths and other
parameters have been entered correctly.
 
To re-send the registration information for this client, the
Commence Administrator must select the Customize-Workgroup
command from the Commence Server PC. Select the Next >
button until you get to the Register screen. Press the Details
button, then press the Re-Register button. This will resend the
registration information to the user.
1057 The communication settings for this workgroup
database are missing or invalid and automatic
syncing is disabled for this session.
To re-start syncing:
1) Use the Customize-Workgroup command to
enter the correct communication parameters, or,
2) Connect to the network and re-start Commence.
 
Check your communication settings using the Customize-
Workgroup command. Select the Next > button until you get to
the Communications screen. Use the instruction sheet provided
by your Commence Administrator to make sure any paths and
other parameters have been entered correctly.
 
Make sure you have access to the shared LAN directory, then try
closing Commence and restarting it.
1058 The communication settings for this database
are missing or invalid. Select the Configure button
to change the settings.
 
Check your communication settings using the Customize-
Workgroup command. Select the Next > button until you get to
the Communications screen. Use the instruction sheet provided
by your Commence Administrator to make sure any paths and
other parameters have been entered correctly.
1059 Shared LAN directory is unavailable and
synchronization
is disabled.
Verify the user's permissions to the shared directory. This
directory requires full read, write, create, delete, and modify
access for all workgroup users. Open this directory using
Windows Explorer on the client PC. Copy a test file to this
directory. Try to delete a test file created by the Commence
server.
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACTION
An action specifies the work to be done by an agent.
In most cases, actions use values or operate on data passed from
the trigger
and/or conditions
defined for the agent. An action (and a trigger) are required to
define an agent.
 
An agent can have up to four specified actions, chosen from
among the following: modify a displayed icon; display a message
box with a specified message; create and display a new view;
open a saved view; add an item; edit an item; print an item or view;
activate an agent; launch an external Windows application; send a
DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange) message to another Windows
application.
 
 
 
 
ACTIVATE
To activate an agent, select the Customize-Database-Agent
command, highlight the agent that you wish to activate then select
the Edit button. You can then select the Active check box.
ACTIVE
An agent is active when the Active check box is selected for that
agent on the Customize-Database Agent dialog box; a check mark
also appears next to the agent name in the Agents list box. An
active agent is triggered by the occurrence of the trigger condition
specified in the rule.
ACTIVE CATEGORY
The active category is the category used by the active view.
ACTIVE VIEW
The active view is the currently displayed view; if more than one
view is displayed, the active view is the view whose title bar is a
different color or shade than all the other windows. On the Window
menu, the active view is indicated by a check mark next to its
name.
ACTIVE WINDOW
The active window is the selected window with which you are
currently working. The active window appears in front (or on top) of
all the other windows on your desktop or application work area; its
title bar is a different color from the other windows. All keystrokes
and commands that you type affect the active window.
AGENT
Agents allow you to specify criteria under which Commence will
perform various tasks for you. An agent consists of a trigger, one or
two optional conditions, and one to four actions. Agents are added,
copied, edited, deleted, activated, and deactivated by selecting the
Customize-Database Agent command from the menu bar.
 
 
 
 
AGENT TOOL BAR
The agent tool bar displays icons for agents with a tool bar pick
trigger, providing the ability to quickly execute these agents by
selecting an icon with the mouse. You must have a mouse to use
the agent tool bar.
You can choose whether or not to display the agent tool bar using
the Edit-Preferences-Tool Bars command. You can also
 
 
 
 
 
ARRANGE
To position fields when you customize an item detail form.
 
 
 
 
ASSOCIATED CATEGORY
When printing a calendar view, items from the associated category
(chosen with the Edit-Preferences-Calendar
command) that occur on the date(s) being printed are printed as
well.
In addition to the Name field, you can select up to two checkbox or
radio group fields from the associated category to appear on the
calendar printout.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BACKUP
To make a copy of a Commence database for use if the original is
lost or damaged. Use the Open/Manage Database command, then
highlight the database name and select the Backup button.
Commence will create a compressed copy of all the data in the
database into a DOS file with a ".xfr" extension. Use the Restore
button to recreate a usable Commence database.
 
 
 
 
BASE DATABASE
When using the Sync Link facility to synchronize databases, the
active database where you define your sync link group is called the
base database. You populate the remote database with the
information from the base database. For detailed information on
creating a a sync link group, see Sync Link.
BUSY BAR
A vertical bar in a calendar day view that indicated when
appointments are scheduled. This feature is no longer available.
CALCULATION FIELD
Calculation fields lets you define formulas based on data in other
fields. Currency, number, date, and time fields can appear in
formulas using addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
operations.
 
Calculation fields can contain a formula using up to 256
characters, including the +, -, *, and / operators, parentheses ( ) for
grouping, and the currency symbol defined via the Windows
Control Panel (in the United States and some other countries, this
is the dollar sign $).
 
You create formulas by selecting other fields from the category and
separating them with arithmetic operators. An example of a valid
formula is: ([End Time]—[Start Time])*[Rate]/100
Note that date and time fields are useful in calculations only when
the difference between two dates or times are taken. For example,
[Start Date]—[End Date] makes sense; [Start Time]*60 does not.
 
You can use the Tools Field Summary command to display the
sum or average of the calculation, currency, and number fields
appearing in a report view.
CATEGORY
A category is a storage container for your data.
 
There is a limit to the number of categories that can be saved in a
Commence database. Refer to the Database Capacities topic for
more information.
CHECK BOX
A check box allows you to select an option. When an option is
selected that has a check box, the check box is filled with an 'X'.
Otherwise the box is empty. When check boxes appear in groups,
you can select as many or as few of the boxes as you want (i.e.,
check box options are not mutually-exclusive).
CHECK BOX FIELD
A check box field is used to represent a yes/no or on/off condition
or option. When an X appears in a check box, the condition or
option is turned on or enabled; when empty, the condition is turned
off or disabled.
CLARIFY FIELD
A clarify field is a field used by categories to distinguish between
items with duplicate names. Commence uses the clarify field when
making connections, importing data, transferrin in data, and
creating letters and faxes.
 
To set the clarify field for a category select the Customize-
Database-Category command, highlight the category that you wish
to change, select the Edit button then the Clarify Field button.
Choose the field that will make each item in the category unique.
CLIPBOARD
A temporary storage area provided by Windows for text or
graphics. An application can cut or copy data to the clipboard for
later pasting into the same or another application's workspace.
COLOR TEMPLATE
A color coding scheme to accent entries in views. You can create
multiple color templates to choose from, up to the limit of 600 per
database.
 
A color template can be based on the value of a check box, a radio
group, or a connection to a particular item. To define a color
template select the Customize-Database-Color Code
COMBO BOX
Used to display a list of choices from which to select when entering
data. Select one of the choices as the default display..
CONDITION
A condition is an additional, optional constraint used to further
define the scope or operation of an agent. An agent's trigger plus
any defined conditions must all be satisfied before the execution of
the agent's action(s).
 
Conditions can be based on time intervals (such as "every
Monday") or on the state of some discrete piece of data in
Commence (such as the number of items scheduled for a
particular week).
 
An agent can have one, two, or no conditions; if present,
conditions are evaluated only after the trigger for the agent occurs.
Some conditions can pass data to the agent's actions.
CONNECT
To establish a connection between two pieces of information in
Commence.
 
 
 
 
CONNECTED FIELD
An connected field is a field from a connected category that you
choose to display in a report view, to use in an agent action, or to
appear in a letter. You select an connected field by choosing the
name of a connection and then selecting a field from the
connected category.
 
For example, if you choose the connection Relates to... to appear
in a report view of the Contact category, you can choose any field
from the Company category (the category on the other side of the
connection), such as the company Name. In the report, all contacts
connected to one or more Company items along the Relates to...
connection display the company Name field from the connected
item(s).
 
 
 
 
CONNECTION
A connection is a link between items in the same category or in
different categories. It shows relationships among items in linked
categories. An example is "Joe Jones has a lunch appointment on
5/10/97". This connects a Person item to an Appointment item.
 
You can establish a link between any two items by creating a
connection definition in the category (if it does not already exist)
and using the connection control to specify the connected item.
CONNECTION CONTROL
A connection control appears in an item detail as a box with three
control buttons. It displays the item names of items that are
connected to the currently displayed item. The connection control
is labeled with the connection definition name.
 
A connection control is added to a category by adding a connection
definition between that category and another category (or a
category and itself). Selecting the name in the connection control
displays the item detail of the connected item.
 
If more than one connected item exists, one or both of the arrows
image/connarrs_shg.gif
at the right of the connection definition will be darkened depending
on whether the item displayed in the connection control is at the
top, bottom, or middle of the list of connected items. Use these
arrows to scroll through the list of connected items.
 
Selecting the assign connection button 
image/conndiag_shg.gif
at the right of the connection control displays a drop-down list of
the item names of all the items from the connected category.
Connected items have a check mark in the left margin next to their
names. Connect and disconnect items by selecting their names
(click the left mouse button two times on a name, or use the arrow
keys to highlight a name and then press the SPACEBAR).
 
Selecting the plus sign 
image/connadd_shg.gif
at the far right of the connection control allows you to add an item
to the connected category; the new item is automatically
connected to the displayed item detail.
CONNECTION DEFINITION
A connection definition is a link between two categories. A
connection definition allows you to create relationships among
items in linked categories. You can establish a link between any
two categories, or between a category and itself. An example of a
connection definition is Person-Has-Appointment.
 
A connection definition is added to a category by adding a
connection between that category and another category (or a
category and itself). A connection control is added to the item detail
and is labeled with the name given the connection when it was
created. Selecting the name in the connection control displays the
item detail of the connected item.
 
You can add a connection to your database by selecting the
Customize-Database-Connection command.
CONTROL MENU BOX
A window's control menu box is the shaded box in the far upper left
corner of the window, on the same level as the window's title bar.
Commands in this standard Windows menu allow you to restore,
move, size, maximize, minimize, close, and switch windows.
 
For an application window such as the main Commence window,
press ALT+SPACEBAR to access this menu. For a document
window, such as a view window within Commence, press ALT+-
(hyphen). Then, use the mouse (or the UP/DOWN ARROW keys
and ENTER) to select a command.
DATA FILE FIELD
The data file field is used to reference a file on your file system
from an item detail.
 
The data file field appears in its entirety (as described below) only
on item details; the file name associated with a data file field can
be displayed in a book, report or calendar view.
 
A data file field on an item detail contains the following elements:
FILE TEXT BOX
Contains the name of the file you want to reference. When adding
an item that has an data file field, type a file name in this box, or
use the Select button (see below) to search your available disks
for an appropriate file.
VIEW BUTTON
Allows you to display the file from the item detail. The extension of
the file must be associated with an editor in [Extensions] of the
file win.ini. See your Windows documentation for how to do this.
 
For example, if the extension .doc is associated with Word for
Windows in your win.ini file, you can select a .doc file in a data file
field and select the View button to edit the file with Word for
Windows.
SELECT BUTTON
Displays the Select File dialog box so that you can search your
available disks for a file.
 
You can include spreadsheets, word processor files, drawings,
images, and other types of information in an item.
 
 
 
 
DATABASE
A set of categories, data items, views, agents that define what data
you can store in Commence and how Commence acts in this data.
Commence provides you with a pre-defined databases that has a
set of categories, desktops, views and agents that support
calendaring, task management and contact management. You can
use this database as-is or you can customize it to meet your
specific needs. You can also create a custom database from
scratch or you can transfer elements from a different database into
your own database using the Transfer command. You can create
additional databases and open them with the Open/Manage-
Database
command.
 
On disk, each database is stored in its own Windows folder and,
because Commence is based on a proprietary database, you will
see many separate files on disk within that directory. Each file, no
matter how small, serves a unique and important purpose. Deleting
or renaming Commence data files (using DOS commands or some
other utility outside of Commence) can result in an unrecoverable
loss of data.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATABASE DIRECTORY
A database directory is a directory in which Commence keeps its
data files. By default databases are created in a folder within the
Application Data Directory. To determine the database folder
containing the files for a particular database, select Open/Manage-
Database, highlight the desired database and select the Edit
button. The path will be the database directory.
 
 
 
 
DATABASE PASSWORD
A password selected by a Commence user to protect a database
from being opened by an inappropriate person.
DATE FIELD
The Date field type lets you enter a date using either the format
you selected from the Windows control panel (such as 1/16/96) or
using English date phrases such as next Tuesday.
 
If a date field is enabled for recurring dates (done at the time the
date field is added to a category), a Recurring Item button is
displayed when an item is added to the category. To enter a
recurring date, you can either select the Recurring Item button on
the Add Item dialog or you can enter an asterisk (*) in the recurring
date field. The asterisk tells Commence to invoke a dialog box that
asks for the recurring date sequence (such as Every Third
Tuesday) when you save the item.
 
Using filters, you can display all the items in a view that match a
particular date. If you use an English phrase in your filter, such as
today, the date won't be evaluated until you invoke the view. Using
Customize-Sort View, you can a view by ascending or descending
date: this will be evaluated first by year, then month, then day.
 
A single date field indicates a specific date, while two fields (e.g.,
start date and end date fields) can be used in a category to specify
a date range. Any category that has two date fields can use the
Gantt view type for displaying items graphically by date interval.
DAY TITLE
Day titles are displayed at the top of the daily calendar just above
the graphical display of time slots. Day titles are appointments or
events that are scheduled for a day but do not have a start or end
time. An example of a day title is "Anniversary".
DEACTIVATE
Prevents an agent from firing under all circumstances. To
deactivate an agent, select the Customize-Database Agent
command, highlight the agent name from the Agents list box,
select Edit then select the Inactive check box.
DEFINITION
The category definitions, view layouts, agent definitions, detail form
definitions, and color code templates that define a Commence
database.
DESIGN
The arrangement and definition of fields in a view or detail form.
DESKTOP
A set of views and item details that can be started all at once.
Multiple dektops can be defined for quick and easy access to data
used for common operations (e.g. contact management,
appointments, scheduling, etc.).
DETAIL FORM
A detail form is a formatted display of a single item from a
particular category. The detail form is displayed whenever you add
an item to or display an item from a category. The detail form
specifies the arrangement, sizes, fonts, and colors of all fields
included in the layout. Not all fields need be included in a particular
detail form. You can create multiple detail forms for each category.
Default forms can be chosen for item detail display and for the
detail view displayed when adding an item to a category. You can
also place a filter on a detail form so that it will be used for all items
that meet the filter.
DIALING DEVICE
A hardware device that allows your PC to automatically dial the
phone. This could be a modem controlled through Windows
Telphony (TAPI), or it can be a direct connection to a supported
TAPI-compliant telephone switch such as the AT&T PassageWay
system.
DIALOG BOX
A dialog box displays a command's options and parameters,
allowing you to review and change them.
DIRECT FIELD
A direct field is a field from the current category. For example, the
Address field is a direct field in the Person category.
DROP-DOWN LIST BOX
A drop-down list box is a special list box that displays only one
entry from a list (the currently selected entry) in a box with a down
arrow button at right. Selecting the arrow button displays the entire
list, with scroll bars (if necessary). You can then select a new item
or select the arrow button again to hide the list.
EDIT BOX
An edit box on a detail form or dialog box is any box that can hold
character data either typed in by you, pasted from the Windows
Clipboard, or pasted from a DOS file.
E-MAIL ADDRESS FIELD
This field type is used specifically for electronic mail (E–Mail)
addresses. Double clicking on an address within this field will open
up a blank mail note (using the default e–mail software) with the
To: field automatically filled in with the selected address.
Commence allows up to eighty (80) characters for each e–mail
address
EXCEL CELL FIELD
An Excel Cell field allows you to access a value from a Microsoft
ExcelŽ spreadsheet and display it in an item detail. Excel cell
values cannot be exported, printed or displayed in a view.
 
Excel cells appear on item details only. The field contains the
following elements:
VALUE
Displays the current value from the Excel cell.
FILE TEXT BOX
Contains the name of the file containing the Excel spreadsheet.
When adding an item that has an Excel cell field, type a file name
in this box, or use the Select button (see below) to search your
available disks for an appropriate file.
CELL TEXT BOX
Contains the name of the cell in the file named in the File text box
to be used as the source for the field value.
SELECT BUTTON
Displays the Select File dialog box so that you can search your
available disks for an Excel file.
EXPORT
To extract data from a Commence database into an external file in
a pre-selected format that other applications can use. Select the
Export-By View or Export-By Category command to create an
export file from items in your open database.
FIELD
A field is a place within a category used to store a particular type of
information. For example, some of the Person category fields are
Name, Address, Business Phone, and Notes. A category definition
can contain 1 to 100 fields, including connections. When you
create a category or add fields to an existing category, you must
specify the name of each field and its type.
 
The available field types in Commence are: calculation, check box,
data file, date, Excel cell, image, name, number, radio group,
sequence number, telephone, text, and, time. A category can have
only one Name field by default. Labels for fields are limited to 20
characters.
FIELD CODE
A variable that can be used in an agent or letter to represent the
data value of a field. See Using Field Codes in Templates for the
basics of using field codes in letters. See Using Field Codes in
Actions for the basics of using field codes in agent actions. A field
code has the form or either (%Field Name%) or (%Connection
Name%%Connected Categroy Name%%Field Name%).
FIELD VALUE
The value stored in a field.
FIELD SUMMARY
Summary statistics that are displayed or printed for a report. You
can include totals or averages for number and calculation fields
provided the Calculation Type option has been set for the fields
using the report layout's Field Options button. To request a field
summary select Tools-Field Summary when a report view is active.
FILTER
A filter creates a subset of the items based on a field value in a
category and displays the items in the view. For example, you can
filter a view to show only your appointments for today or your To-
Dos that are not completed. You can also filter on a connection to
another category. For example, you can filter on all People
employed by Widgits, Inc. Lastly, you can combine up to four filter
cirteria to get a set of items. For example, you can filter your To-
Dos to show the tiems that are due today, are Priority 1, and are
not completed. You can change the filter on a view by selecting
Customize-Filter View from the menu bar.
 
 
 
 
 
FORMATTED TEMPLATE
Formatted templates are word processor documents and are used
for writing letters using data stored in Commence. The word
processor is used to view, print, or fax letters based on the
formatted template. You can create a formatted letter template by
selecting Customize-Database-Letter Template.
 
Like text templates, formatted templates can include Inserted
Fields that are used to indicate merged values for the Commence
data item. However, unlike text templates, formatted templates
(and the letters you write with them) can include any special
formatting supported by the word processor: e.g., multiple fonts,
indents, bookmarks, fields, bitmaps, tables, etc.
 
 
 
 
GLOBAL SEARCH
A feature that lets you find all items in the database that contain or
exactly match a particular text string.
GROUP BOX
The group box element of a dialog box is used to organize several
options under one main heading.
GROUP CALENDARING
The capability to add an appointment to your client database and
share it with all authorized workgroups users. Used in conjunction
with the Tools-Schedule Meeting command and the Personal
Information Preference.
HYPERTEXT TRANSFER PROTOCOL
The system for requesting HyperText Markup Language (HTML)
documents from the World Wide Web (WWW).
HYPERTEXT MARKUP LANGUAGE
HyperText Markup Language is a collection of platform-
independent styles (indicated by markup tags) that are used to
define the various components of a World Wide Web document.
HTML
Refer to HyperText Markup Language
HTTP
Refer to HyperText Transport Protocol
IMAGE
 
Generally, an image is a piece of data produced outside of
Commence. It can be an image produced by a scanner, video
camera, illustration or presentation software, or any other software
capable of copying images to and from the Windows Clipboard.
IMAGE FIELD
Image fields hold Windows device-independent bit maps that are
produced by a scanner, camera, graphics software, and most
software that is capable of copying images to and from the
Windows Clipboard. To put a bitmap into an image field, it first must
be placed onto the Clipboard, then you can use Edit-Paste to put it
into the field. Alternatively, you can select the field and then choose
Edit-Paste From. This will allow you to copy an image directly from
a file.
 
If you are using Microsoft's Windows for Pen Computing®, you can
also draw into an image field. You can display an image field only
in an item detail. It can be printed along with the rest of the item
data.
IMPORT
To bring data from other applications into items in your open
Commence database. Select the Import command to import a file.
INACTIVE
An agent is inactive when the Active checkbox is unchecked for
that agent. An inactive agent cannot be triggered.
ITEM
An item is a record in the database. Each item can store values for
one or more of the fields defined for the category. For example, a
Person category would contain items that each describe individual
contacts, and might have the following fields defined: address,
phone number, comments, company employed by, etc.
There is an upper limit to the number of items that can be saved in
a category. Refer to the Database Capacities topic for more
information.
 
ITEM DETAIL
An item detail is a formatted display of a single category item; a
category item is displayed in an item detail whenever you add
items to or display items from a category.
 
The item detail's format is determined by the detail form chosen;
the detail form specifies the arrangement, sizes, fonts, and colors
of all fields included in the layout. Not all fields need be included in
a particular detail form.
 
You can create multiple detail forms for each category. Default
forms can be chosen for item detail display and for the item detail
displayed when adding an item to a category.
LAN
Local Area Network.
LAYOUT
A pre-defined or custom template that defines the field
arrangement in a view or an item detail. (See also: Paper Layout)
LEGEND
A small window that explains the color-coding scheme in a
calendar or Gantt chart view. To display a legend, select
Customize-Design View-Color Code, then check the Show
Legend check box.
LETTER TEMPLATE
A form letter that tells Commence what literal text to display and
where to insert data field values from the selected item(s).
 
It is stored as an external file in the tmplts subdirectory of your
active database directory. Letter templates can use fields from a
category and automatically fill in values when you write a letter.
Commence supports two types of letter templates, a Text
Template and Formatted Template. Both types can be used with
an external word processor.
LIST BOX
A list box shows a column of available choices, with scroll bars
provided if there are more than can fit in the box displayed.
Usually, you highlight one of the entries in the list, but some list
boxes allow you to highlight multiple entries.
MAPPING
The process of determining what fields and what order they should
be in when doing an import or export of ASCII, dBASE, or DIF files.
Select the Map button of the Template Definition dialog box to
define your field mapping.
 
 
 
 
 
MULTI-SELECT LIST BOX
A multiple selection list box is a special list box
where you can select more than one item in the list.
 
An item in the list box is selected (highlighted) by clicking the left
mouse button on the item. Clicking on another item selects that
item without removing the highlight from the already selected item.
To deselect a highlighted item, click the left mouse button on it. If
the list has more items in it than can fit in the list box, you can
scroll through the list by clicking the mouse on the scroll bar on the
right side of the box, or by clicking and dragging the box within the
scroll bar.
 
SEE ALSO:
Keyboard How to use a multiple selection list box with a keyboard.
 
 
 
 
NAME FIELD
Exactly one item name field is required for every category item; it is
used to store the item's name, which can be up to 50 characters.
The name field is labeled "Name" by default, but you can change
the label by editing the category's name field definition. This field
type cannot be removed from the category.
NUMBER FIELD
A number field can hold whole numbers (123), floating-point
numbers (123.45) or currency numbers ($123.45). You can also
use the Tools-Field Summary command to display the sum or
average of the number fields in a report view.
 
 
 
 
PAPER LAYOUT
A pre-defined or custom template that defines how you want a view
or item detail printed. You can define paper layouts for printing to a
day planner, or printing envelopes and labels. to define a paper
layout, select Home-Page Setup. You can also define a default
paper layout to be used when printing each view.
 
 
 
 
PASSWORD
You can set a password for your Commence database by selecting
Edit-Preferences-Database.
PREFIX STRING
Prefix string characters help you search for one item in a long list
of items in a report view, Gantt chart view, grid view, Book view, or
connection definition. Begin typing the name of the item you are
searching for and the highlight in the view moves to the first item in
the list whose name contains the prefix string you've entered.
PROPERTY
A property is a characteristic of a view or category that you can
change. Properties include: data definition; size; layout; fonts;
sorting order; filters; preferences; and other attributes.
 
All properties of the active view are accessible through Customize
on the menu bar.
RADIO BUTTON
A radio button allows you to choose an option to a command by
selecting the button. When selected, the center of the button goes
dark, indicating that the option is currently selected. If the center of
the button is not darkened, the option is not selected.
RECURRING ITEM
An item is recurring if the category is defined with a Recurring
Date Field and the recurring button is selected.
 
If you add an item and select the Recurring Item button or enter
an asterisk (*) in the recurring date field, and then select the Save
button, the Specify Date Range dialog box is displayed. You can
specify a frequency and date range for Commence to create
multiple items (such as every Monday in June). These items are
associated by a Related Date connection which allow these items
to be changed or deleted as a group.
Note: The date range specified for Recurring Items are referred to
as Recurring Dates. All recurring items are connected through the
Related Date connection.
RELATED DATE
A category is that defined with a Recurring Date Field will include
a Related Date connection. This connection is used to associate
items which are added as Recurring Items and allows these items
to be changed or deleted as a group.
 
 
 
 
 
REMOTE DATABASE
The databases in a Sync Link sync link group
that are kept synchronized via the base database.
Changes made on the remote database are re-synchronized to the
base database.
 
To define one or more remote databases for the sync link group;
open the base database and select the Sync Link Out command.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESTORE
To select a compressed back up file and restore it to a usable
Commence database. Click the Commence Application Button in
the upper left corner, choose the Open/Manage Database
command, then highlight the database to overwrite and select the
Restore button. You can not restore into the active database.
 
 
 
 
RIBBON
An application Ribbon shows the available commands and is
located at the top of the window, just below the title bar. Similar
commands are grouped onto Tab pages. The available Tabs on the
Commence Ribbon are: Home; Edit; View; Customize; Tools; and
Help.
 
 
 
 
SAVED VIEW
A saved view is a view that has been stored on disk using the
View-Save View or View-Save View As
commands from the menu bar. When you create a new category, a
default report view is automatically saved. When you alter the
properties of an existing saved view, the resulting new view is not
automatically saved; you must use either View-Save View or View-
Save View As to retain the new view.
 
 
 
 
SCROLL BARS
A window's scroll bars allow you to view information that is longer
or wider than the current window size. If present, they are located
at the right side and bottom of the window.
SEARCH TEXT
The text for which you want to search all name, text, date, time,
data file, check box, and radio group type fields in one or multiple
categories. Specify the search text with the Global Search
command.
SELECTION FIELD
A selection field can have one of two attributes:
radio group: presents two to eight mutually exclusive values for a
field, depending on how many radio button fields you
name when you add or edit the field. You select one of
the radio buttons in the group as the default value.
 
combo box presents up to 4,000 mutually exclusive values for a
field, depending on how many selections you define
when you add/edit the field.
SEQUENCE NUMBER FIELD
A sequence number field is used to automatically assign a unique
number to every item added to a category. You can assign your
own starting value to this field type, which must be in the range
+/-2,000,000,000.
SNOOZE
A feature of agent-generated message boxes that allows you to put
a message box to sleep for a set period of time. When the time
elapses, the message box reappears.
STATIC AREA
This is a part of the screen that cannot be changed by the user.
The area can be changed by the program. The area is used to
diplay information to the user.
STATUS BAR
The status bar is located at the very bottom of the Commence
main window. It displays: a brief description of the currently
highlighted menu command (if any); a description of the view icon
at which the mouse is currently pointing (if any); operational
messages; today's date; the current time; and, a count of the
number of items from the active category displayed by the active
view.
SYNC LINK
A feature that lets you maintain identical databases on PCs that
are not connected via a LAN. See Sync Link Concepts for more
information.
SYNCHRONIZE
The process of communicating changes from one database to
another. Changes to definitions as well as to items are
communicated.
 
 
 
 
TELEPHONE FIELD
A telephone field lets you store telephone numbers in any format
you wish. If you have a modem connected to your computer and
Telephony installed, you can dial a telephone field displayed in a
view or a detail form.
Note: To dial international numbers, you must enter your telephone
numbers using the canonical format, +cc (ac) number, where cc is
the country code and ac is the area code.
 
 
 
 
TAB
When you select many commands in Commence a dialog box will
appear with many choices. Each of these choices will appear on a
Tab towards the top of the dialog box. Selecting a tab will bring all
of the options available for that tab to the front of the screen.
TEXT BOX
A text box is a rectangle into which you type information. An
insertion point (a vertical bar) indicates the editing point when you
move to the box. If there is already text in the box, all the text is
selected and anything you type replaces the entire selection. You
can also edit any text in the box using the delete, backspace,
arrow, and keyboard keys.
TEXT FIELD
A text field holds unstructured ASCII data. Text fields can be
specified in three sizes: up to 80 characters; up to 30,000
characters; or a user-specified number of characters up to 30,000
characters. Blank spaces, blank lines, and new line control
characters contribute to the character count.
TEXT TEMPLATES
A template for writing letters using data stored in Commence. A
text template does not supply sophisticated formatting capabilities
(i.e., no fonts, bold or italics, indents, etc.).
 
In the Send Letter dialog box, the type of a text template is TXT,
the standard Windows file extension for text only files. Virtually all
word processors can import, edit, and create text files. When you
highlight a text template in the list box and select View or Print,
Commence creates a text only letter by substituting the Field
Codes it finds in the template with values from the highlighted item
in the active view or from the active item detail. Field Codes are
special text strings that are used to represent data values from
Commence items. The use of Field Codes is described under
Customize-Database-Letter Templates.
TIME FIELD
A time field lets you enter a time using the format you selected
from the Window control panel (such as 4pm or 18:00). A single
time field can indicate a specific time, while two fields (e.g., Start
Time and End Time fields) can be used to specify a range.
 
A default value of Start in a time field definition in a category tells
Commence to start a timer when an Add item is opened. A default
value of Stop or Now in a time field definition of the same category
tells Commence to stop the timer when the item is first saved.
 
Any category that has at least one time field and one date field in it
can use the calendar view type for displaying items graphically by
time slot. A category that has a date field, time field and an alarm
checkbox can also be alarmed using the Item Alarm trigger type.
TITLE BAR
A window's title bar shows the title or name of the window. The
window title reflects the object(s) displayed in the window. The title
bar is located at the top of the window, between the control menu
box and the maximize and minimize icons. The title bar of the
active window is a different color or shade than the rest of the
windows on the desktop.
TOGGLE
A toggle is an option that can be either on or off. The toggle may
be a check-mark toggle on a menu (which is turned on if a check
mark appears next to the entry), a check box (which is turned on if
the box has an 'X' in it), or a radio button (which is turned on if the
button is darkened).
TOOL BAR
A toolbar is the area at the top of a view or form that displays icons
for commands that affect the active view or form. Toolbars provide
the ability to quickly execute these commands by selecting an icon
with the mouse. In many cases, keyboard shortcuts are also
available for toolbar commands.
The Agent Toolbar is an area reserved on the Ribbon to display
user-defined buttons. The Agent toolbar is not displayed when
there are no Agents defined with a Tool Bar Pick trigger.
The Calendar Toolbar appears at the top of calendar views.
TOOL BAR AGENT
A type of agent that appears as a button on the Home page of the
Ribbon, in the Agents group of buttons. Selecting the button
causes the agent to execute. Select the Customize-Database-
Agent command  to create or modify an agent.
TRANSFER
To copy a definition (such as a custom category, its views, and the
data in that category) to another dissimilar Commence database.
Optionally, you can transfer items and referenced data files along
with their definitions.
TRANSFER FILE
An external file created by the Transfer Out command.
SYNC LINK GROUP
A group of Standalone PC’s that are kept synchronized using Sync
Link.
TRIGGER
A trigger is an event or time that causes an activated agent to
evaluate the other agent conditions (if any) and, pending the
successful evaluation of the conditions, execute the action(s)
specified for the agent. A trigger (and an action) must be specified
in order to define an agent.
 
Triggers can be based on: the occurrence of a particular time; a
menu bar or command bar selection; adding, editing, or deleting an
item; the occurrence of date or time conflicts when adding an item;
the occurrence of an item alarm; the receipt of a specified DDE
(Dynamic Data Exchange) message from another Windows
application.
UNIFORM RESOURCE LOCATOR (URL)
A standardized format providing a pointer to information available
on the World Wide Web (WWW).
UPDATE FILE
The DOS file created by the Sync Link Out command.
URL
Refer to Uniform Resource Locator
URL ADDRESS FIELD
This field is used specifically for Uniform Resource Locator (URL)
addresses. Double clicking on a URL address will launch the Web
Browser (if not already open) and go directly to the indicated web
site. Commence allows up to 1024 characters for each URL
address.
VIEW
A view is a formatted display of category data. You create a view
by combining a category and a view type. The format of the view is
determined by the view layout.
 
 
 
 
VIEW BAR
The Commence view bar is a column of view icons on the left of
the main Commence window. By clicking the mouse on an icon,
you open the view associated with the icon.
 
Select the View-Save View As
command from the menu bar to add or remove a view's icon on the
view bar.
The view bar holds a maximum of 40 icons. You can display or
hide the view bar, choose whether or not to display icon labels
and/or the plus buttons for easy adds, by selecting the Edit-
Preferences-Tool Bars command from the menu bar, and checking
the appropriate check boxes.
 
 
 
 
VIEW TYPE
A view type is the basic display style for a view. There following
view types are supported: Book, Calendar, Gantt chart, Grid,
Document, Multi-View, Report (the default view type), and Report
Viewer. When speaking of views, a shorthand phrase like "a book
view" means "a view that uses the Book view type".
WILDCARD PATTERN
A wildcard pattern is used in commands which search for text or
filenames. Search text may contain wildcard characters, the
asterisk (*) and the question mark(?). A question mark means that
any character can occupy that position. An asterisk means that any
character can occupy that position or any of the remaining
positions.
 
The combination of normal text and wildcard characters is called a
wildcard pattern.
WORK AREA
Synonym for desktop.
Menu Command Keys
These key sequences allow you to choose menu commands
without a mouse. Mouse users may also find it easier to input
some commands from the keyboard rather than using the mouse.
ALT+[Key Tip Letter]
Select one of the tabs from the Ribbon.
Once you select a tab, the Key Tips will appear for each
command that is available. Press the letter shown in the
Key Tip for the command you want to use.
CTRL+P Print
SHIFT+DELETE
CTRL+X Edit-Cut
CTRL+INSERT
CTRL+C Edit-Copy
SHIFT+INSERT
CTRL+V Edit-Paste
DELETE Edit-Clear (if the cursor is in a field on a detail form and
some text is highlighted)
Deletes character to right of cursor if the cursor is in a field on a
detail form and no text is highlighted.
Edit-Delete Item (if an item in a view is highlighted)
CTRL+A Edit-Add Item
ENTER Edit-Edit Item (i.e., highlight an item in a view using the
arrow keys and press ENTER to edit the item. If you
highlight an empty time slot in a calendar view and
press ENTER, you execute the Edit-Add Item
command)
CTRL+D Edit-Delete Item
F1 Help-Index or dialog and message box help
SHIFT-F1 Help-Context-Sensitive
CTRL-F4 Close the active view.
ALT-F4 Exit (close Commence)
Dialog Box and Detail Form Keys
Use the following keys to fill out dialog boxes and detail forms
without the aid of a mouse:
 
TAB Select the next field in a dialog box or item detail.
SHIFT+TAB Select the previous field in a dialog box or item
detail.
CTRL+TAB Move to the next tab in an item detail.
CTRL+ALT+TAB Insert a TAB character into a text field.
SPACEBAR Activate the currently selected radio button or check
box field; place or remove a check mark next to an
item name in a connection field list box.
ARROW KEYS Move the insertion point in any field containing
text; scroll through connected item names in a
connection field (this is the equivalent of selecting
the narrs_shg.gif buttons with the mouse); highlight
items in a list box; select entries in a selection field.
RIGHT ARROW For connection fields, opens a list box showing
the names of connected items (this is equivalent to
selecting the ndiag_shg.gif button with the mouse);
once you do so, SPACEBAR connects and
disconnects the highlighted item in the list box;
ENTER closes the list box.
LEFT ARROW For connection fields, open the item detail of the
connected item whose name currently appears in the
connection field (this is equivalent to selecting the
item name with the mouse).
PLUS SIGN on
numeric keypad For connection fields, open an add item detail
form for the connected category (this is equivalent to
selecting the nadd_shg.gif button with the mouse).
ENTER or CTRL + S Save the form or dialog box; close a
connection field's list box.
SHIFT+ARROW KEYS Select text in a field.
DELETE Delete the selected field text.
ENTER Insert a carriage return into a text field.
INSERT Change the insertion mode in a field containing text.
ALT+BACKSPACE Undo an edit in a field containing text.
(Effective only before save item.)
ESC Cancels changes for item or connection pop-up.
CTRL+F For connection pop-up, toggles the filter
CTRL+1 For connection pop-up, displays pop-up in one list.
CTRL+2 For connection pop-up, displays pop-up in two lists.
CTRL+A For connection pop-up, saves changes and adds item to
connecting category.
CTRL+E For connection pop-up, saves changes and edits
highlighted item in connecting category.
CTRL+B Move to the previous item shown by the detail form.
CTRL+N Move to the next item shown by the detail form.
CTRL+K Move to the first item shown by the detail form,
CTRL+L Move to the last item shown by the detail form.
Multiple Selection List Box Keys
Use the following keyboard keys to select from and scroll through
a multiple selection list box:
 
SPACEBAR For the list box item with the list box cursor (a dotted
outline) on it, selects (or deselects) the item
without affecting already selected items in the list.
RIGHT or DOWN ARROW Moves the list box cursor to the next
item in the list.
LEFT or UP ARROW Moves the list box cursor to the preceding
item in the list.
PAGE UP Scrolls the currently highlighted item to the bottom of
the list box and moves the cursor to the first visible
item in the list.
PAGE DOWN Scrolls the currently highlighted item to the top of
the list box and moves the cursor to the last visible
item in the list.
HOME Scrolls the first item in the list to the top of the list box and
moves the cursor to it.
END Scrolls the last item in the list to the bottom of the list box
and moves the cursor to it.
Keys for Arranging Detail Forms
The following keys allow you to arrange fields on the Design
Detail Form dialog box without the aid of a mouse.
 
TAB select the field you want to move
SPACEBAR "grab" the highlighted field -- alignment guides
appear when the field is "grabbed"; press
SPACEBAR again to release the field
ARROW KEYS move a "grabbed" field in small increments
CTRL+ARROW KEYS move a "grabbed" field in large increments
View Control Keys
You can use the keys in the table below to navigate around any
book, calendar, Gantt chart, grid, or report view).
 
UP ARROW highlight the item above the currently highlighted
item
DOWN ARROW highlight the item directly below the currently
highlighted item
HOME highlight the first item in the view
END highlight the last item in the view
PAGEUP scroll up
PAGEDOWN scroll down
CTRL+PAGEUP scroll left
CTRL+PAGEDOWN scroll right
LEFT ARROW (book view only) go backward one page
RIGHT ARROW (book view only) go forward one page
 
Calendar views provide additional mouse controls on the control
panel located under the monthly calendar. Keyboard equivalents
to using these controls are listed in the following table. These
keys change the active date and may change the information
displayed in daily, weekly, and monthly display modes (see
Customize-Design View).
 
CTRL+T Return to daily display mode for today.
 
LEFT ARROW move the outline box in the monthly calendar to
the previous day; change the active date to that
day's date
 
 
RIGHT ARROW move the outline box in the monthly calendar to
the next day; change the active date to that day's
date
 
CTRL+LEFT ARROW change the monthly calendar to display the
previous month; change the active date to one
month previous to the current active date
 
CTRL+RIGHT ARROW change the monthly calendar to display
the next month; change the active date to one
month after the current active date
 
CTRL+PAGEDOWN change the monthly calendar to display the
current month for the following year; change the
active date to one year after the current active date
 
CTRL+PAGEUP change the monthly calendar to display the
current month for the previous year; change the
active date to one year before the current active
date
 
CTRL + 1 display in Day mode
 
CTRL + 2 display in Two Day mode
 
CTRL + 3 display in Two Week mode
 
CTRL + 4 display in Month mode
 
CTRL + 6 display in Six Week mode
 
CTRL + 7 display in Week mode
 
CTRL + 9 display in Grid mode
 
CTRL + Y display in Year mode
Window Control Keys
The following keys allow you to control the windows displayed by
Commence. Most of them apply to all windows in the Windows
environment.
 
Note that document windows are identified by the short dash
displayed in a box in the upper left hand corner of the window.
Application windows are identified by the long dash displayed in a
box in the upper left hand corner of the window.
ALT+- Select the control menu box for a document window.
ALT+SPACEBAR Select the control menu box for an application
window.
<underlined letter>
ARROW KEYS+ENTER Once you select a control menu, press
the underlined letter of a command to execute that
command, or use the arrow keys and ENTER to
select a command.
CTRL+F4 Close a document window.
CTRL+F5 Restore a maximized document window to its previous
smaller size.
CTRL+F6 Switch to the next document window.
SHIFT+CTRL+F6 Switch to previous document window.
CTRL+F7 Move a document window.
CTRL+F8 Size a document window.
CTRL+F9 Minimize a document window.
CTRL+F10 Maximize a document window
Mouse Shortcuts
For mouse users, selecting means pointing at something on the
screen (like a time slot in a calendar view, a button in a dialog
box, a name or label in a list box, etc.) and double-clicking the left
mouse button.
In dialog boxes where there are several command buttons,
pointing and double-clicking on a list box entry with the mouse
defaults to an edit operation, though not all dialog boxes have an
edit operation (in this case, there usually is no default command).
Pointing and double-clicking the left mouse button on an item in a
view invokes the Edit-Edit Item command and displays the item
detail of the item.
Pointing and clicking the left mouse button on a view icon on the
view bar or on a command button on the tool bar opens the view
or invokes the command.
As you pass the mouse pointer over a button on the view bar, tool
bar, or the control panel of a calendar view, the message box on
the status bar displays a short description of the button's purpose.
A short command description is displayed in the status bar's
message box when you point at a menu name on the menu bar
with the mouse, hold down the left mouse button, and move the
mouse pointer over the command names on the menu. Releasing
the button while pointing at a command executes the command.
Calendar Items Dialog Box This dialog box is
displayed when you double click on a Day Title arrow
or on the date in a weekly, monthly, or yearly
calendar display mode.
 
This dialog box displays all of the appointments for the selected
day. Highlight the name of the item from the list box and then
select the Add, Edit, or Delete button. Selecting Add causes an
Add Item to screen appear. Selecting Edit causes an Item Detail
screen to appear. This screen lets you view or edit the item. You
can move the appointment by editing the date or time values.
Selecting Delete deletes the highlighted item. Select OK to exit
the dialog box without choosing an item.
 
Alternatively, you can double-click the left mouse button while
pointing at the name of the item you want to select. This causes
an Item Detail screen to appear (as does the Edit button).
Active Date
The calendar view initially displays today's date in the center of
the Calendar Tool Bar at the top of the calendar window; this is
called the active date. As you select different dates and calendar
Display Modes using the Calendar Tool Bar, the active date
displayed changes to match the dates you select. The date is
displayed in the format you set through the Windows Control
Panel.
Display Modes
There are a variety of display modes for the calendar view. They
are Day, Two Days, Week, Two Weeks, Month, Six Weeks, Grid
and Year modes.
 
Item names associated with the active date are displayed in the
calendar view window in a Day, Two Days, Week, Two Weeks,
Month, and Six Weeks display mode. The Year display mode
shows all the dates for the active year by displaying twelve
monthly calendars.
 
The default display mode is the Day mode. To change the display
mode, select a display mode from the drop down list on the left of
the Calendar Tool Bar.
 
Select one the buttons below to see a description of the features
and controls in each display mode:
 
Day Day Display Mode
Two Days Two Days Display Mode
Week Week Display Mode
Two Weeks Two Weeks Display Mode
Month Month Display Mode
Six Weeks Six Weeks Display Mode
Grid Grid Display Mode
Year Year Display Mode
Calendar Tool Bar
At the top of every Calendar view there is a tool bar that lets you
change certain aspects of the calendar display. Use the control
buttons to change the display mode, move to a different active
date or to show/hide the color code legend.
DISPLAY MODE
Select the calendar format you wish to display. Choose from
day, 2 days, week, 2 weeks, month, 6 weeks, or year.
LEGEND
Selecting this button or selecting the Customize-Design View
command ,click on the Display tab and mark the Show Legend
checkbox, toggles the display of the legend. When the legend is
displayed, a small window appears that explains the color
coding used in the busy bars. You can change the color coding
used in a Calendar view by selecting a color coding template
with the Customize-Design View command and clicking on the
Colors tab. You can create new color coding templates using
the Customize-Database command and selecting the Color
Code tab.
PREVIOUS DAY OR INTERVAL
Selecting this button displays the previous day, 2 days, week, 2
weeks, month, 6 weeks, or year, depending on the current
display mode.
CURRENT DAY OR INTERVAL
Selecting this button lets you change the date, week, month or
year that is displayed. This displays the Select Date dialog box
where you can display monthly calendars to select a date and
then select the OK button to return to the calendar view.
NEXT DAY OR INTERVAL
Selecting this button displays the next day, 2 days, week, 2
weeks, month, 6 weeks, or year, depending on the current
display mode.
RETURN TO TODAY
Selecting this button displays today's appointments. This is a
quick way to return to today's appointments after examining
past or future appointments.
PREVIOUS DAY WITH ITEMS
Selecting this button displays the first day (before the currently
displayed day or interval) for which items are scheduled.
NEXT DAY WITH ITEMS
Selecting this button displays the next day (after the currently
displayed day or interval) for which items are scheduled.
 
Select Date Dialog Box
The Select Date dialog box is displayed when you click on the
CURRENT DAY OR INTERVAL button on the Calendar Tool
Bar or when you double-click on any date field in an item detail or
dialog box. In this dialog box you can display monthly calendars
to select a date and then select the OK button to return to the to
the previous screen with the selected date.
 
The elements of this dialog box are:
YEAR BUTTONS
Select a button for the year you want to see in the Monthly
Calendar. If the year you wish to select is not displayed, press
the Left Arrow button to scroll to previous years or select the
Right Arrow button to scroll the years ahead and then select a
year button.
MONTH BUTTONS
Select a button for the month you want to see in the Monthly
Calendar.
MONTH CALENDAR
This displays the month selected by the Year and Month buttons.
The initial month displayed is the month of the date field from
where you started this dialog box. Click on a day in the Month
Calendar to change the selected date.
OK
Select the OK button to return to the previous screen and have
the selected date replace the date field from that screen.
CANCEL
Select the Cancel button to return to the previous screen without
changing the date.
Working with Detail Form Tabs
A detail form is organized into a series of “pages,” with each page
displayed as a separate folder tab across the top of the opened
detail window. Not all detail forms require multiple pages in order
to display all pertinent information. In those situations, a single
folder tab will appear rather than the multiple tabs shown above.
By grouping related areas of a detail form, and including them on
their own, dedicated page, completing a complex form can be
done easily by switching between pages, which is as easy as
clicking the left mouse button on the desired folder tab. Up to 25
individual tabs may be defined per Detail Form.
 
TAB NAME
The Tab Name identifies the tabbed window that will appear
across the opened Detail Form and must be unique within a
detail form. It can be up to 16 characters.
 
CUT
Select an area of the detail form or a group of fields, then use
Edit-Cut or Right click-Cut. This copies the selected objects into
the buffer and deletes them from the visible tab. .
 
COPY
Select an area of the detail form or a group of fields, then use
Edit-Copy or Right click-Copy. This copies the selected objects
into the buffer.
 
PASTE
Pastes the buffer contents into the active tab.
 
DELETE
Deletes the selected objects. CAUTION: if nothing is selected
then all objects on the form including all tabs are deleted. Ifyou
wish to cancel this command, select File-Exit from the menu
without saving your changes.
 
ADD TAB PAGE
Adds a new page to the detail form. Fields can be displayed on
the page using drag & drop, or using the copy/paste commands
from another tab page.
 
DELETE TAB PAGE
This will delete the active tab. Be sure to click the tab you wish
to delete so that the fields on that tab are visible before using
this command. Commence asks for confirmation before deleting
the tab and will not let you delete the only tab for a detail form.
 
SWAP TABS
This allows you to rearrange the order in which the tabs will
appear across the opened Detail Window. The active tab is
replaced with the tab you choose from the list, and the active tab
moves to the other tabs position. The tabs (and ultimately the
corresponding pages of the Detail Form) should be arranged in
the order in which the pages will be completed when entering
data.
 
PROPERTIES
Lets you control the appearance of the form. Refer to Form
Properties or Chapter 5 of the Commence User’s Guide for more
details.
Tab Order Dialog Box
Commence automatically sets the tab order based on each field’s
position on the detail form. The tab order starts with the field in
the upper left corner, then tabs to the next field(s) in that row (if
any). Then Commence tabs to the beginning of the next row,
similar to hitting the carriage return key on a typewriter. You can
determine which fields are in the same row by aligning the tops of
the boxes.
 
Select Format-Tab Order the Detail Form Design dialog box to
change the tab order for data entry, use the Up and Down
buttons to reorder the fields.
 
UP OR DOWN BUTTONS
Highlight a field, then repeatedly click on the Up or Down
buttons until the field is in the postion you want. Repeat this step
for the associated field label to keep the field and its label
together for design purposes. Note the label will not be included
in the tab order for the finished form. This will be used to
determine the tab order of fields when entering data.
 
OK
Select the OK button to save the tabbing order for the fields on
the detail form tab.
 
CANCEL
Select Cancel to cancel your changes.
 
AUTO TAB ORDER
Select this button to base the tabbing on the arrangement of the
fields on the detail form tab.
View Types
See Also
When creating a new viewterms_view, you select a view
typeterms_view_type to tell Commence how to structure the
window used to display view data.
There are several view types delivered with Commence. Each
provides a distinct display format. They are briefly described
below; select the name of the view type below to see a detailed
description of its capabilities:
Book displays items alphabetically by the item name field of
each item (up to 20 fields can be included); each page of the
book displays items whose item name fields begin with the
letter appearing at the top of the page
Calendar displays items on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis in
an appointment calendar format; each item must have start
time, end time, and date values
Gantt Chart displays items in a traditional Gantt Chart format;
each item must have start date and end date values
Grid displays fields from one or more categories in a
row/column format. It can be used in two modes: read-only and
update mode.
Document diaplays a Web page as a view window on the
Commence desktop.
Multi-View Displays a set of related views in one window frame.
The view is split to show the primary and secondary views.
Report displays user-selected fields of an item in a multi-row,
multi-column format; the graphic format of the display (fonts,
labels, etc.) is also user-selectable
Report Viewer displays data from your Commence database in
WYSIWYG format as a print preview. Data can be viewed,
printed, and exported to various file formats.
 
You can use prefix matching to find a particular item in a long list
of items in a report view, Gantt chart view, Book view, or Grid
View.
Once you choose an appropriate view type and display a view,
you can refine how the view displays data items by selecting a
command from the Customize-Design View menu.
Choosing a View Type and View Layout
A view layout specifies required information for the view type
used in a view. This information may be required field mappings
(for a calendar or Gantt chart), the list of fields to display (for a
book or report), or various display aspect of the view type such as
fonts (for a report).
Calendar and Gantt chart views require specific field types in the
category used by the view. A calendar one time fields (one for
start time) and one date field (the due date field; i.e., the date the
item takes place). A Gantt chart view requires two date fields (one
for start date and one for end date of each item). Commence
needs to know the names of the fields from the active category to
use for these required pieces of information.
When you create a view, Commence picks appropriate defaults
for the view layout, and displays the resultant view. Commence
always successfully picks defaults for book and report views.
It is possible that Commence may not be able to pick appropriate
defaults for a calendar or Gantt chart view, either because the
view does not have required field types or has more than one
field of the required type(s). If Commence cannot pick reasonable
defaults, a dialog is displayed that informs you of this fact.
If the view does not have fields of the required type(s), the view
cannot be displayed using the view type you selected. You must
Cancel and try to create the view again using a different view
type.
You can display and change the view layout for a view using the
Customize-Design View command and clicking on the Fields tab.
Multi-View Properties Wizard
See Also
When you create a new multi-view or edit an existing one, you
are prompted for the various properties of the view. Select the
appropriate values and then press the Next button until all options
are selected.
 
 
PAGE 1: Setting the view properties
A multi-view window can be split into two panes, either
horizontally or vertically. You can choose your preference based
on what works best with the data you are displaying or how you
like to arrange views on your desktop.
 
Enter a new view name to describe the multi-view as a whole.
This unique “View Name” is used to identify the view and cannot
be a duplicate of an existing view name in the Open/Manage
Views list. All the required properties have now been set. You
may click Next> to continue setting up the multi-view or configure
the optional settings below.
 
To add a shortcut on the View Bar for the multi-view, set the
following properties:
 
1 Type a brief View Icon Label.
2 Choose an appropriate icon to represent the multi-view in
general.
3 Choose whether you wish to display the multi-view shortcut
on the View Bar and/or Views Menu, and for which
desktops.
 
PAGE 2: Setting the view pane size/position
 
The option to Save Position, Size, and Panes on Exit is turned
on by default. This allows you to resize the multi-view window as
a whole and retain that size and position on the desktop.
 
The splitter bar separates the primary window from the secondary
window in a multi-view. The window panes are initially split with a
default value, however the splitter can be reset to any proportion
totaling 100%. If the option to Save Position, Size, and Panes
on Exit is also enabled, then you can adjust the proportions any
time after the multi-view has been created by simply dragging the
splitter bar on screen.
 
Enabling the option to Save Position, Size, and Panes on Exit
is the only way to save changes to the multi-view window; the
View-Save View commands will continue to work on the active
view within the multi-view. However the multi-view window as a
whole will not be affected by the standard view commands.
 
PAGE 3: Setting the Primary View(s)
The primary view for a multi-view window can be any of the
following view types:
. Book View
. Calendar View
. Gantt View
. Report View
. Grid View
 
When selecting the primary views, you may choose a view-linked
view. Linked views in the primary pane are able to interact with
views outside the multi-view window or with the filtering toolbar in
the primary pane of the multi-view. However, linked views in the
secondary pane of a multi-view window will only respond to the
primary view within the same multi-view window.
 
The list of views can be sorted by View Name, Type, or by
Category. Double-click on the column heading to resort the list.
Once you have found the view of your choice, click the Select
View button or click on the handle to the right of the View Name.
Confirm that the view you chose is shown in the “Selected
Primary Views” box below. You may click Next> to continue
setting up the multi-view.
 
PAGE 4: Form Option
If the detail form option is left unchecked, double-clicking an item
in the primary window of a multi-view opens the form in a new
window. Because the new window is outside the multi-view frame
it is not linked to the secondary views in the multi-view window.
For example, browsing to the next item in a new form window will
not update the secondary views in the multi-view window.
 
When the form option is turned on, double-clicking an item in the
primary window opens the form within the primary window of the
multi-view frame. The primary view will use the filters and sorts
defined for the view you selected to determine which items to
display.
 
When you select the form option, you must also choose a default
detail form layout from the list of forms in the category. The form
layout you select will be used to display all items as you traverse
through the items in the view using the browse buttons on the
Detail Form toolbar. For this reason, it is recommended that you
select a general form displaying all the necessary fields,
regardless of the item data. Filtered detail forms would typically
not be appropriate.
 
To save your choice, click the Select Form button. Confirm that
the view you chose is shown in the “Selected default form view”
box below. Click Next> to continue setting up the multi-view.
 
PAGE 5: Setting the Secondary Views
At least one secondary view must be defined before you can save
the multi-view. Secondary views in a multi-view window can be
any of the following view types:
. Book View
. Calendar View
. Gantt View
. Report View
. Grid View
 
The list of views can be sorted by View Name, Type, or by
Category. Double-click on the column heading to resort the list.
When selecting secondary views, keep the following guide-lines
in mind:
Including a view in a multi-view window does not limit you
from re-using that view elsewhere in the application. Views
that are part of a multi-view window can still be opened
independently outside the multi-view window.
Multi-views can support up to 100 view tabs in the
secondary window.
Multi-views are optimized to handle numerous large views
in the secondary window. Large views are those displaying
hundreds of thousands of items or views approaching the
maximum number of fields.
Each view in the secondary window is not loaded until
after the view tab has been opened, not when the multi-
view window is opened.
Linked views in the secondary pane of a multi-view
window will only respond to the primary view within the
same multi-view window.
Unlinked views and views that are linked to different
categories can also be added as view tabs in the
secondary window. However, there is no dynamic
relationship between the data in unlinked views and the
data in the primary window of the multi-view.
 
Once you have chosen a view, click the Select View button or
click on the handle to the right of the View Name. Confirm that the
view you chose is shown in the “Selected Secondary Views” box
below. Repeat this step to select as many secondary views as
needed. To undo a selection, click the {X} button. This will remove
the view tab from the multi-view window. De-selecting a view in
this manner will not delete the view from the database.
 
After you have selected the secondary views, you can customize
the tab label for each view as needed. The tab label can be up to
15 characters. This label is used for display purposes only, to aid
you in locating a particular view in the multi-view window.
Duplicate tab labels are allowed but are not recommended to
avoid confusion. The tab labels are not used to determine the
order of the tabbed windows.
 
The tabbed windows will be arranged in the secondary window
from left to right in the order shown here, not alphabetically. If you
would like to rearrange this order, use the [up arrow] and [down
arrow] buttons to move the tabs up or down in the list. Views
accessed most often should be moved to the top of the list.
 
Click Finish to save the multi-view configuration. The completed
multi-view can now be accessed from the list of views defined
under the View - Open/Manage Views dialog. The multi-view is
now ready to use.
Document View Options
The Document view provides a way to integrate Internet and
intranet based applications and pages directly on your
Commence desktop.
 
Document views are created using the same command as regular
views. When in Document Options:
 
1 Enter the URL pointing to the HTML document you wish to
display, using the following examples.
Type the Internet address - for example,
www.commence.com
Type the complete path and file name to an HTML file - for
example, c:\program files\commence
workgroup\Web Companion.htm
Type the complete path and file name to a Microsoft Office
document - for example, c:\my documents\test.doc
(assumes test.doc is an existing file in this directory)
2 Click OK to open the view.
 
Tip Keywords can be used when specifying the URL - for
example, (-ProgramDir-)\Web Companion.htm
 
For more information on the Document View, see Document View
Type.
Customize-Design View-Fields Tab (Book Views)
See Also
Selecting the Customize-Design View command while a report
view is the active view displays the Design View tab.
This tab allows you to choose the fields to appear in the book and
set field options as explained below. You can also select the
name type field of items from connected categories to display in
the book. A book view can display up to 20 fields per item.
Any changes you make to the design are temporary unless you
use Views-Save View or Views-Save View As to save the
changed view.
The Fields in Book and Fields Not In Book list boxes show the
list of fields that appear in the book and those that don't appear in
the book, respectively.
To append a field to the list of fields in the book (making the new
field appear last in the book), highlight the field name in the
Fields Not In Book list box and select the Append Field button.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields Not In
Book list box to append it to the Fields In Book list without
selecting the Append Field button.
To insert a field into the list of fields in the book, highlight a field
name in the Fields Not In Book list box and highlight the position
where you want the field inserted in the Fields In Book list box.
Then, select the Insert Field button.
To remove a field from the book, highlight the field name in the
Fields In Book list box and select the Remove Field button.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields In Book
list box to remove it without selecting the Remove Field button.
The Fields in Book list box displays field names in the order in
which the fields appear in the book. If a field is in the the incorrect
position, you must remove the field from the report, then place
the field in the correct position by using either the Insert Field or
Append Field button.
You can also combine fields in the report by selecting the
Combine Fields button and then selecting the desired fields.
Customize-Design View-Display Tab (Report and Grid
Views)
 
In addition to the print title and paper layout options, Report and
Grid views also allow you to set the following display options:
FORMAT
REPORT VIEW
Select the format for a report by choosing the Horizontal or
Vertical radio buttons from the Format group box. Horizontal
format prints one item per row with fields listed from left to right;
field labels appear across the top of the report. Vertical format
displays one item per column, with fields listed from top to
bottom; field labels appear on the left side of the report. Fields
are listed in the order in which they appear in the Fields In
Report list box in the Fields tab.
 
GRID VIEW
Select the format for a grid view by choosing Detailed or
Summary from the Format group box. Detailed displays the
groups with the items. Summary displays just the group heading.
 
ALLOW UPDATE MODE (GRID VIEW ONLY)
If checked, this option allows updating of items in the view without
opening a detail form.
 
SPACE BETWEEN FIELDS (REPORT AND GRID VIEW)
Set the space between columns and rows in either format by
changing the values in the Space Between Fields group box. In
the Horizontal text box, type the amount of space between
columns. In the Vertical text box, type the amount of space
between rows.
NUMBER OF COLUMNS
REPORT VIEW
Specify the number of columns for a vertical format report by
typing in the appropriate number in the Number of Columns text
box. The default is 1; the maximum is 20.
 
GRID VIEW
This option is not customizable in a grid view.
 
SHOW LABELS
REPORT VIEW
Include labels for fields in a view by turning on the Show Labels
check box. Labels are included on the left side of a vertical format
report and across the top of a horizontal format report.
 
GRID VIEW
Include labels for fields in a detailed grid view by turning on the
Show Labels check box. Turning on this option displays the view
with group headings. Note, to show the groups, the sort order for
the view must at least have group headers on for the primary sort
field.
 
REMOVE BLANK LINES BETWEEN ITEMS
REPORT VIEW
By default, all items in a report are assumed to be of the same
height as the largest item. For horizontal reports, this is the height
of the largest field in the report; for vertical reports, this is the
height of the largest item in the report. If the largest item is
significantly bigger than other items in the report, this can lead to
a great deal of wasted space on the report. To eliminate this
space for items that are smaller than the largest item, turn on the
Remove Blank Lines Between Items check box.
 
GRID VIEW
This option is not customizable in a grid view.
 
COMPRESS LINES BETWEEN FIELDS
REPORT VIEW
Check to remove any extra blank lines between fields. This option
does not affect the blank space inside a field.
 
GRID VIEW
This option is not customizable in a grid view.
 
SHOW GRID LINES (GRID VIEW ONLY)
Displays grid lines on the view.
 
CONNECTION FIELDS (REPORT AND GRID VIEW)
Connection fields are fields from a connected category. When you
select a connection definition name on the Fieldstab, you specify
the field from the connected category to be displayed on the view.
Since an item in your report may be connected to more than one
other item, you must specify the maximum number of connected
items that can be displayed, and the number of lines needed to
display each connected field. These options are global settings
for the view; they apply to all the connection fields in the report.
 
Number of Items specifies the maximum number of connected
items for which the connection field will be displayed. The default
number is set to 2. You may enter any number between 1 and
750. For example, say your view is defined for the
Person/Company category, and you wish to display Notes
connected to each person. A person may be connected to one
note or hundreds of notes. The default setting would display only
the first 2 connected notes per person, even if they are connected
to more notes.
 
Lines Per Item specifies the amount of space allocated on the
view for each instance of the connection field in the view. The
default is a height of 1 line per item. You may enter any number
between 1 and 750. Using the example above, only the first line
of each note would be displayed in the view.
 
If you select values that are too small to display all the connected
items for a particular connection field, the word (more) is
displayed at the bottom of the connection field.
Finding Items with Blank Number Fields
To filter for a blank number field, you need to obtain all the items
with a zero value.
1. Display the view you wish to filter. For help, see Opening a
View.
2. Select the Customize-Filter View command from the menu
bar. To set the filter, select the Filter1 tab.
If you are creating more than one filter select the Summary tab.
3. In the Filter for All Items list box, select the number field to
filter on.
4. Select the Equal To comparison operator from the drop down
list.
5. Enter the number 0 into the Field Value text box.
6. Select the OK button.
This returns you to the active view and the filter will be in effect.
Finding Items with Blank Connections
To filter for a blank connection, you need to obtain all the items
except those which have the connected Name field filled with any
characters. To do this:
1. Display the view you wish to filter. For help, see Opening a
View.
2. Select the Customize-Filter View command from the menu
bar. To set the filter, select the Filter1 tab.
If you are creating more than one filter select the Summary tab.
3. Next to the Filter for All Items list box, turn on the except
checkbox.
4. In the Filter for All Items list box, select the connection field
to filter on.
5. Highlight the Name type field for the connected item in the
Filter by list box.
6. Select the Contains comparison operator from the drop down
list.
7. Enter the ? wildcard character into the Field Value text box.
8. Select the Save button.
This returns you to the active view and the filter will be in effect.
Edit-Preferences
Calendar Choose calendar view type preferences.
Database Allows you to password protect your database.
Dialer Choose a dialing device.
Event Logs Choose the categories to use for logging letters and
phone calls.
Letters Choose preferences for writing letters, including which
word processor to use for formatted letters.
Meeting Select the category, fields and connection definitions
used when scheduling a meeting.
Other Choose miscellaneous preferences.
Other Apps Configure Commence to be used with other
applications, such as your E-Mail application,
Outlook Calendar, or handheld.
Personal Info Designate an item that contains information about
yourself and select which connection definitions
will default to this item.
Tool Bars Display or hide the tool bar, the status bar, and the the
view bar. Specify a directory of icon files to be
used on the Tool bars.
View Choose preferences for saving views.
Change Database Password Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Set Password...
button on the Database Preferences dialog box. This option lets
you set a password for your copy of the database, whether it be a
personal, local database, or a shared client database. This
password is different from the login ID and password which must
also be entered when you attempt to open a shared database
which has been password protected by the Commence
Administrator.
To change or create a password follow these steps:
1. If this is the first time this database has been password
protected, the Old Password field is grayed out. Otherwise,
type your current password in the Old Password field.
2. Type the password you want into the New Password text
box. The characters you type are echoed with asterisks in
the text box.
3. Type the password again into the Verify Password text box.
4. If you correctly entered the Old Password (if any), and
entered the same password into the New and Verify
Password text boxes, Commence returns you to the Other
Preferences dialog box. If you made a mistake, Commence
displays a message box asking you to try again. Select OK
and go back to Step 4.
5. Select Save to close the Database Preferences dialog box.
Select the Cancel button to return to the Database Preferences
dialog box without changing the database password.
Print Letter Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Print button on
the Send Letter dialog box with a text template highlighted.
COPIES
In the Copies text box, enter the number of copies of the letter
that you want to print.
DRAFT QUALITY
Check the Draft Quality check box if you want a lower resolution
printout and your printer supports this print mode.
FONTS
If you want to select a different font for the letter, chose the Fonts
button. Commence shows you the Select Font dialog box. The
specific fonts available depend on the configuration of your
system. Keep in mind that the font you select will be applied to all
the characters in the letter.
OK
Select OK in the Print Letter dialog box to start printing the letter.
The letter prints on the default printer selected by Commence
(see Printer Setup).
CANCEL
As with other printing done by Commence you can cancel the
printing operation by selecting the Cancel button from the dialog
box displayed while printing.
Letter Template Tab
See Also
This tab is displayed when you select the Customize-Database-
Letter Template command. Select one of the Add buttons to add
a Text or Formatted template, or choose a letter template from
the list and select either the Edit or Delete buttons.
 
The Letter Template tab contains these elements:
CATEGORY NAMES
Use the Category Names drop-down list box. category to select
the category containing the data for your letter.
LETTER TEMPLATES LIST BOX
This list box shows the names and types of all letter templates
available for use with the category you selected.
ADD TEXT BUTTON
Select this button to add a text template for the selected category;
Commence displays the Letter Template dialog box.
ADD FORMATTED BUTTON
Select this button to add a formatted template for the active
category; Commence displays the Add Formatted Template dialog
box.
EDIT BUTTON
Select this button to edit the template highlighted in the Letter
Templates list box; Commence displays the Letter Template
dialog box or Edit Formatted Letter Template dialog box,
depending on the type of the letter template.
 
Shortcut: You can double-click the left mouse button while
pointing at a template name to edit the template without selecting
the Edit button.
DELETE BUTTON
Select this button to delete the template highlighted in the Letter
Templates list box. Commence asks for confirmation before
deleting the template. Select Yes from the confirmation message
box to delete the template; No to cancel the deletion.
CLOSE BUTTON
Once you are done working with letter templates, select OK to
return to the work area.
Home Menu Commands
Use commands on the Home menu to:
 
Message Log View a log of error messages, agent messages,
and other informational messages.
Send Letter Create a letter using fields
from a highlighted item or the active view. A letter template
(which specifies the fields to use in the letter) must be
defined for the active category in order to write a letter
using fields from that category.
Dial Phone Dial the phone number of the highlighted item; if
there is more than one number displayed, a dialog box is
displayed so that you can choose the number to dial.
Send Generate a report or calendar view in HTML format and
attach to an email message.
Print Print views, item details, and labels.
Printer Setup Setup printers.
Print Preview Preview the printout prior to sending it to the
printer.
Page Setup Define Page layouts; set printed page margins;
choose whether or not to print a title and date on each
printed page
Agents Menu 1, 2, 3 ... Launch user-defined agents with menu
pick triggers; also reviews the pre-defined menu pick and
tool bar pick agents..
Launch Views 1, 2, 3 ... Open a view whose name appears at
the bottom of the Views menu.
 
Commence Application button Commands
Commands to manage your database are available by clicking
the Commence application button in the upper left corner.
 
Open/Manage Database Open a database, add, edit, delete,
backup, and restore databases.
Exit Exit Commence.
New/Edit Agent Dialog Box
See Also
If you select the Add, Edit or Copy buttons on the Agent tab, you
get a dialog box that lets you setup an agent’s components.
 
The title of the dialog box will be either New Agent (if you are
adding or copying an agent), or Edit Agent (if you are editing an
existing agent). The elements within the New Agent and Edit
Agent boxes are identical.
 
If you are adding a new agent and just want to review the options
for conditions and actions, first press the T button to select any
trigger. Then select either 1 or A to view the possible conditions
and actions, respectively. You can make selections for both
conditions (1 and 2) and still go back and change the trigger.
However, you should not make a final selection of the agent
actions until after you have decided on the trigger and conditions
for the agent since different selections can change the available
options for some actions.
 
The elements of this dialog box are:
AGENT NAME TEXT BOX
If you are adding or copying an agent, this text box is blank; you
must fill in an agent name before you can save an agent. If you
are editing an agent, the Agent Name text box contains the name
of the agent you are editing; you can change the name by typing
new text into the box.
 
ACTIVE CHECKBOX
Turn this checkbox on to activate the agent. Uncheck the box to
deactivate the agent. Another way to temporarily deactivate all
agents is to use a command line option on /noagents.
 
Note: When you save a new agent, the status of the new agent
will be set to activate so you can start using your new agent
immediately.
IF THIS TRIGGER OCCURS GROUP BOX
This box shows the current trigger selection for the agent. If there
is a label of (none) to the right of the button, then there is no
trigger currently set for that agent.
 
If you want to view or change the trigger, select the button labeled
T to bring up the Add Trigger dialog box; if a trigger is already
defined, the Edit Trigger dialog box is displayed. The Edit
Trigger dialog box is identical to the Add Trigger dialog box,
except it is filled in with the details of the existing trigger.
 
AND THESE CONDITIONS ARE TRUE GROUP BOX
This box shows the current condition selections for the agent. If
there is a label of (none) to the right of the button, then there is
not a condition currently set.
 
To view or edit a condition, select one of the buttons labeled 1 or
2 to display the Add Condition dialog box; if a condition is already
defined, the Edit Condition dialog box is displayed. The Edit
Condition dialog box is identical to the Add Condition dialog
box, except it is filled in with the details of the existing condition.
 
You cannot select either of the 1 or 2 buttons unless a trigger has
been selected.
 
THEN PERFORM THESE ACTIONS GROUP BOX
This box shows the current action(s) selected for this agent. If
there is a label of (none) to the right of a button, then there is not
an action specified for that position. To view or edit one of the
actions, select one of the buttons A, B, C, or D to display the Add
Action dialog box; if an action is already defined, the Edit Action
dialog box is displayed. The Edit Action dialog box is identical to
the Add Action dialog box, except it is filled in with the details of
the existing action.
 
You can look at the selection of triggers by selecting the T button
under If this Trigger occurs. However, you will not be able to
select a condition button (1 or 2) or an action button (A to D)
unless a trigger has been selected.
 
OK AND SAVE BUTTONS
If you are editing an agent in the Edit Agent dialog box and have
not made any changes, select OK to return to the Agent tab. If
you have made any changes to the agent, the OK button changes
to a Save button. If you select Save, Commence saves any
changes that you make to the agent (its name or the
specifications of its components).
 
CANCEL BUTTON
Select the Cancel button to return to the Agent tab without
saving a new agent or to undo changes to an edited agent.
Time Conflict Layout Dialog Box
In order to enable time conflict checking for the selected category,
you must specify the name of a date field, and the names of two
time fields, and select the Report Time Conflicts check box.
Once you do so, Commence will warn you if a new item conflicts
with the time and date of an existing item.
 
Another feature of time conflict checking is checking start time
and end time fields to make sure you specify an end time that is
later than the start time. To enable this checking for the active
category, you need only select fields for Date, Start Time, and
End Time, and select the Save button (you don't need to turn on
the Report Time Conflicts check box).
 
If you cannot select fields for one or more of the parameters, you
will not be able to enable time conflict checking for the category.
You can, however, add date and/or time fields to the category and
then enable time conflict checking. See Adding and Editing Fields
 
The date field specifies the date on which the item, occurs, and
the time fields specify the time span of the event described by the
item. You can specify the same field for Start Time and End
Time, indicating that items in the category have no time span
(i.e., they occur at a particular time, not for a duration of time).
 
Commence uses the date field to select items from the category
with which to compare the new item; it uses the time fields to
calculate a time span that is compared to the time span of other
items occurring on the date in the date field. If the date field of the
new item matches the date field in an existing item and the time
spans of the items overlap in whole or in part, a time conflict is
reported.
 
 
If the Connection to use for conflict checking connection
definition is not set and you have time conflict checking turned on
(the default), you are warned whenever you add an appointment
to a time slot with an existing appointment, regardless of who is
involved in the appointment.
 
The fields you choose for time conflict checking can be changed
at any time.
Enabling Time Conflict Checking
1. Select the Customize-Database-Category command. You
will see a Category Names list box. Select the category for
which you want to enable time conflict checking.
2. Press the Time Conflict button. The Time Conflict dialog
box is displayed.
3. Select the arrows on the drop-down list boxes for Date,
Start Time, and End Time to display a list of all the date
and time fields (as appropriate) in the active category. If
there are no fields of a particular type, only the name (none)
will appear in the associated drop-down list when you select
it. Select a field from each list box, or Cancel if appropriate
fields don't exist.
4. Turn on the Report Time Conflicts check box.
5. Select the name of the connection definition you want
Commence to use when checking for time conflicts by
highlighting that connection definition in the Connection to
use for conflict checking drop-down list box.
6. Select the Save button.
If one of the field boxes is set to (none) when you select the
Save button, Commence attempts to pick an appropriate
field. If it cannot, time conflict checking will not be enabled
for the category.
Disabling Time Conflict Checking
1. Select the Customize-Database-Category command. You
will see a Category Names list box. Select the category for
which you want to enable time conflict checking.
2. Press the Time Conflict button. The Time Conflict dialog
box is displayed.
3. Turn off the Report Time Conflict check box.
4. Select the Save button.
Print Items Action A Print Items action can print
single items or sets of items. You can chose to print
the trigger item, the condition items, or a saved view
by selecting one of the radio buttons under Print
Items In. If you select View, the drop-down list box
under View Name lets you select from your existing
set of views.
 
Selecting the Print Options button will allow you to specify
details about the printing.
 
The print action is useful for agents that will periodically print
reports. For example, you can create an agent that will print out
your calendar for the week every Monday morning at 9 AM.
Add/Edit Action Dialog Box
To add, edit or delete an action in your agent, select one of the
four action buttons (1 to 4) on the New Agent or Edit Agent dialog
boxes. You then see the Add Action dialog box (if you are adding
a new action) or the Edit Action dialog box (if you are editing an
existing action). The controls and operation of the two boxes are
identical.
 
The same dialog box is used for all actions, but its contents vary
depending on what action you highlight in the Action Type list
box. A brief description of the action you have selected is shown
under the list box. The right hand side of the dialog box is used to
set the options for the action type you select. As you select
different action types, this side of the box will change to show you
the appropriate options.
 
Every agent can have up to four actions. Actions define the work
that an agent does when its trigger has fired and its conditions (if
any) are true. You can specify some actions independently of the
agent's trigger or conditions, but in most agents actions use the
trigger or condition item(s). Thus it is necessary to define an
agent's trigger and conditions before defining the actions. In fact,
you cannot even view the condition and action options until you
make a trigger selection. (The trigger can be changed later, but if
any actions were specified using the trigger item from the first
trigger, they also have to be changed.)
For complex agents, it is important to know that an agent's
actions are performed in the order that they appear in the agent's
definition. This is significant because if one action edits the trigger
item or the condition items, then a subsequent action will receive
the edited items, not the original ones.
 
Actions can range in sophistication from displaying a simple
message on the status line to editing multiple fields in an
incoming set of data items. One action, the message box, even
lets you define up to four sub-actions that can be performed in
response to the selection button on the message box.
 
If you select Clear in the Add Action or Edit Action dialog box,
the options for the current action are cleared. The OK command
saves the current options, and the Cancel command restores the
previous values (in an edit situation).
 
If an action is changed or cleared before selecting Cancel, you
can select the original action type and the original values will
appear.
 
Option specification for individual agent actions is described with
each action type; choose an action from the list below.
 
The full set of actions available for Commence agents is the
following:
 
Add Item
Adds a new item and optionally displays the item
Application Launch
Starts an application with command line parameters Backup
Make a backup of the open database
Create E-Mail
Create and send an electronic mail message
Delete Items
Deletes an existing item
Edit Item
Edits an existing item and optionally displays the item Export
Exports to a pre-selected file using a pre-selected template
Icon Modification
Changes the appearance of an icon on the icon bar
Import
Imports from a pre-selected file using a pre-selected template
Manage Desktop
Cascades, tiles, or closes all views. Also, opens a desktop.
Message Box
Displays a message dialog box (and optionally presents user
selectable sub-actions) New View
Displays a new view
Open View
Displays an existing view
Outlook Sync
Starts a synchronization of data with Microsoft Outlook Play
Multimedia
Play a Windows multimedia file.
Print Items
Prints a view or an item
Print Letter
Generates and prints a letter using a template
Process E-Mail
Deletes or moves electronic mail message into a folder Send
DDE
Sends a DDE message to another application
Set Agent Status
Makes another Agent active or inactive
Status Bar Message
Displays a message on the status line
Sync Link In
Apply Sync Link In updates using a pre-defined file Sync Link
Out
Generate a Sync Link Out to a pre-defined file
Use Telephone
Will answer a telephone call, dial the telephone, or hang up the
telephone
 
All the actions (except Icon Modification, Open View, and Set
Agent Status) allow you to use the trigger item or one of the two
condition item sets (if you have selected conditions for the agent)
as part of the action specification. See Using Trigger and
Condition Data.
 
Using Field Codes, you can also insert values from a trigger or
condition item into your action specifications. See Using Field
Codes In Actions.
Select Directory Dialog Box This dialog box appears
when you choose the Select button from a dialog
box that requires a directory path in a text box. The
Select Directory dialog box lets you search through
the available disks on your system for an
appropriate directory path.
 
The elements of this dialog box are:
DIRECTORIES
This element contains two items a Directory Line to display the
selected path and a list box of the directory structure.
DRIVES
This is a list of available drives for your system. Select the drive
where the directory your are selecting is located.
OK
Use this button to accept the directory specified. The path shown
on the Directory Line is the resulting path used by the dialog box
to which you return.
CANCEL
Select the Cancel button to cancel the select directory operation.
HELP
Select the Help button to provide help for the Select Directory
dialog box.
CREATE DIRECTORY
If you cannot find the directory or you would like to create a new
directory select the Create Directory button.
Using Transfer Commands
See Also
The general procedure for transferring definitions from one
database to another is:
 
1. Use the Open/Manage Database command to open the
database containing the definitions you want to transfer.
2. Select the Transfer Out command. This command copies
selected categories, views, agents, and data (if desired) from
your database to a DOS file.
3. In the Transfer Out Options dialog box, select either
Category or View. Then select the specific categories or
views and agents to transfer.
4. Turn on the Items check box to transfer data as well as
definitions from the selected categories or views. If you
select the Items box, you may also choose to transfer any
DOS files pointed to by data file fields in transferred items.
Turn on the Related Data Files check box to do so.
5. Select OK. The Select Transfer File dialog box appears.
6. Type a file name for the transfer file in the Filename text box
and select OK.
The transfer out begins. Commence keeps you informed of its
progress and tells you when it is finished. Select OK when
the message box indicates that the transfer is completed.
7. Using the File-Open/Manage Database command, open the
database into which you want to read the transfer file just
created. If this database resides on a computer other than
the one on which you created the transfer file, be sure to
make the transfer file accessible to this computer via floppy
disk, a shared LAN drive, etc.
8. Select the Transfer In command. This command copies the
definitions (and data, if any) from the DOS file that was
created with the File-Transfer Out command into the
currently open database.
9. In the Select Transfer File dialog box, enter the path name
of the transfer file in the Filename text box and select OK.
10. If the transfer file contains data, the Transfer Rules dialog
box appears. Make the appropriate selections and select OK.
The transfer in begins. Commence keeps you informed of its
progress and tells you when it is completed. Select OK when
the message box indicates that the transfer is completed.
Customize-Design View-Display Tab (Calendar and
Gantt Views)
In addition to the print title and paper layout options, Calendar
and Gantt views also have one or more of the following display
options:
DISPLAY MODE
For calendar views, selecting Display Mode opens a cascade
menu from which you choose one of the mode options, Image,
Day, 2 Days, Week, 2 Weeks, Month, 6 Weeks, Year and Grid
modes. The currently selected option has a check mark to the left
of its entry on the cascade menu.
 
Shortcut: As an alternative to using the Display Mode command,
you can use the mouse to click on the display mode drop down
list in the calendar view window (see Calendar Tool Bar).
TIME SCALE
Allows you to change the time scale for a calendar or Gantt chart
view. The time scale determines the time interval used in the view
and also affects how many items can be viewed on one screen.
 
For calendar views, selecting Time Scale opens a cascade menu
from which you choose one of the time scale options, 5, 6, 10, 15,
20, 30, or 60 Minutes. The currently selected option has a check
mark to the left of its entry on the cascade menu. The time scale
specifies the number of minutes between the appointment slots
(default: 30 minutes) in Day display mode (see Display Modes).
 
For Gantt chart views, selecting Time Scale opens a cascade
menu from which you choose one of the time scale options, Day,
Week, Month, Quarter, Year, or Auto. The currently selected
option has a check mark to the left of its entry on the cascade
menu. The time scale specifies the time gradation to be used for
displaying task intervals (default: auto -- Commence examines
the range of data being displayed and selects an appropriate
scale).
START TIME
Allows you to change the starting time of a calendar view (i.e., the
time associated with the first time slot in day display mode).
 
In day display mode, a calendar view displays multiple time slots,
each of which displays the names of the appointments scheduled
for the time associated with the slot. By default, the first time slot
is associated with 8:30AM.
 
You can change the time associated with the first time slot of a
calendar view by typing in a new Start Time. The time specified
must be in the same format that you have selected in the
Windows Control Panel.
 
Commence validates your chosen start time according to the
currently set time scale. That is, you cannot specify a start time
that, given the currently set time scale, would result in empty time
slots in day display mode. Commence will display a message box
and ask you to choose another time if your start time is invalid;
the message box also tells you the latest possible valid start time
given the currently set time scale.
Filter Tabs
When you select one of the Filter tabs on the Filters tab, it
displays the fields and connections from the active category,
along with the buttons described below.
 
FILTER FOR ALL ITEMS (By field value)
To filter by field value, first highlight a field Filter for All Items list
box. The available filter options on the right half of the screen will
change, depending on the field type of the highlighted field. See
Filtering by Field Value for more information.
 
Note: If you are filtering for all items based on the value in a field
and not a connection, the Filter By list box will be grayed out,
and the words (Field value) will appear in this list box.
FIELD VALUE
Enter the field value to filter for in this text box. You may use
wildcards to keep the filter broad based. In the case of date and
time fields, you may also use natural language date and time.
FILTER BY
To filter for all items connected to a particular item name, first
highlight a connection name in the Filter for All Items list box.
Notice that the words (Connection to item) appear in the Filter by
list box and the right half of the screen now displays a list of all
the item names and clarify fields (if any) for the connected
category. Then select an item name from the list of items in that
category.
 
If you prefer, rather than selecting a particular item name, you
can turn on the checkbox to Use highlighted item in open view.
The latter option filters the view so that the only items shown are
those connected to whatever item is currently highlighted in an
open view for the connected category. For more information about
setting up view links, see Customize-Link Views.
 
You are not limited to filtering on the name type field only. To filter
on any field within the connected category, highlight the field in
the Filter by list box and select a field value on the right. To filter
on a connection within the connected category (selected in the
Filter for All Items list box) you can highlight a connection name
in the Filter by list box and select the connected item name from
the list box on the right half of the screen.
Color Code Tab
This tab is displayed when you select the Customize-Database-
Color Code tab. From this tab, you can select the Add button to
add a new color code template, or highlight an existing template
and choose the Edit or Delete buttons.
CATEGORY NAMES
This list box shows all the categories in the active database.
COLOR CODE TEMPLATES
This list box shows all the currently defined color templates for all
categories in the active database.
ADD BUTTON
Selecting this button displays the Select Color Field. Pick the field
on which to base your color code template, then the Color Code
Template dialog box is displayed.
EDIT BUTTON
Selecting this button displays the Color Code Template dialog box
filled in with the definition of the color template highlighted in the
Color Code Templates list box.
 
Shortcut: Mouse users can double-click the left mouse button
while pointing at a template name to edit it without selecting the
Edit button.
DELETE BUTTON
To delete a color code template, highlight the appropriate
template name from the Color Code Templates list box on the
Color Code tab, then select the Delete button. Commence asks
for confirmation before deleting the template.
CLOSE BUTTON
Select Close when you are finished working with color code
definitions.
Connection Dialog Box
Selecting the Customize-Database-Connection command
displays the Connection dialog box, which lists the names of the
connections from the active category to other categories. Use this
dialog box to establish connections between categories.
 
See Connections Overview for a discussion of the basics of
connections and connecting items together.
 
See Connecting an Item to Another Item for how to connect items
using connection controls on item detail forms.
 
Use the buttons on the right side of the dialog box to add, edit,
and delete connection definitions as described below.
ADD BUTTON
To add a connection definition for the active category, select the
Add button to display the Add Connection dialog box. From this
box, you can add a connection definition between any two
categories (or between any category and itself) in the currently
open database.
EDIT BUTTON
When editing connection definitions, you are allowed to rename
both directions of the connection definition; no other changes
are allowed.
 
To edit a connection definition shown in the list for the active
category, highlight the connection definition whose name you
want to edit and select the Edit button. The Edit Connection
Names dialog box is displayed, with the current connection
definition names filled in. You can then edit the name(s) for the
connection definition.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the left mouse button on the connection
definition name you want to edit.
 
Caution: Changing certain connection definitions may cause
unintended effects in your data. An example would be changing
the name of the simple connection (Related Date) between the
Calendar category and itself; changing the name of this
connection definition would remove the associations among
recurring date items in the category and these items would not
be able to be changed or deleted as a group.
 
Commence detects when you choose such a connection
definition for editing and displays a warning message box that
informs you of the potential problems in changing the name of
the connection definition you've selected for editing. Select the
OK button on the warning message box to continue. If you want
to abort the editing of this connection definition, select OK and
then select the No button on the next dialog box displayed.
DELETE BUTTON
To delete a connection definition shown in the list for the active
category, highlight the connection definition in the list box and
select the Delete button. Commence asks for confirmation
before deleting the connection definition. Select Yes from the
message box asking for confirmation to delete the connection
definition.
 
Typically, you will want to delete a connection definition that you
are not using to free up space in a category for more field
definitions. A connection definition adds two fields to the total
number of fields in the category. You should be careful, however,
when choosing a connection definition to delete.
 
Caution: Deleting certain connection definitions may cause
unintended effects in your data. An example would be deleting
the simple connection (Related Date) between the Calendar
category and itself; deleting this connection would remove the
associations among recurring date items in the category and
these items would not be able to be changed or deleted as a
group.
 
The same is true for agents. If you delete a connection definition
on which an agent depends, the agent will no longer function as
intended. You will have to update any agents that depend on the
deleted connection definition yourself using the Customize-
Database-Agent command.
 
Commence detects when you choose such a connection
definition for deletion and displays a warning message box that
informs you of the potential problems in deleting the connection
definition you've selected for editing. Select the OK button on
the warning message box to continue. If you want to abort the
deletion of this connection definition, select OK and then select
the No button on the next dialog box displayed.
ADVANCED BUTTON
The list of items in the connected category can be sorted and
filtered to make items easier to locate. For example, you may
want to filter your connection to To-Do’s to only show
uncompleted To-Do’s.
 
To filter the connection list, press the Select Filter button. The
filter can be toggled on and off by the end-ser by clicking the
filter button on the connection toolbar. Checking theFilter by
default box will apply the filter automatically when the
connection list is opened. (See Filter Tab for more information
about how to filter a list of items)
 
To sort the connection list, press the Select Sort button. (See
Sort Fields for more information about the Sort Fields dialog
box.) For example, you may want to sort connections to the
Calendar in date descending order so the most recent items
appear at the top of the list.
 
To layout the columns of data displayed in the connection field,
press the Field Option button. (See Connection Field Options
for more information about the Field Options dialog box.)
 
By default, connections allow as many related items as needed
to be selected. For example, an Appointment can be related to
multiple attendees, and likewise a contact may be related to
many appointments. This is known as a “many-to-many”
relationship. If necessary, the connection can be configured to
allow “many-to-one”, “one-to-many” or “ one-to-one”
relationships by turning on the option to Allow At Most 1
Connected Item. This option must be enabled in both directions
of the connection for a true one-to-one relationship.
CLOSE BUTTON
Select Close when you are finished working with connection
definitions.
Connections Overview
A connection is a bi-directional link between two categories or
between a category and itself. Use the Customize-Database-
Connection command to add, edit, and delete connections
between any two categories.
Once you establish a connection, you can link items from the
categories participating in the connection together to create
relationships among your data, and reduce the amount of
redundant data in your database.
A connection is named when you create it, and the name should
reflect the reason that the categories are linked together.
For example, let's say you have a Contacts category and a
History category, as in the tutorial data. A link from the Contact
category to the History category called "Relates to" can be used
to connect a Contact item to the History item for the notes that
refer to that person in the Contact item. Likewise, the History item
would have a connection called “Relates to” that links the person
to the note in the History category.
You must specify a name for both directions of a connection
between two categories, as in the example in the previous
paragraph. A connection that has two directions is called a paired
connection.
For a connection between a category and itself, you give the
same or different names to both sides of a connection. A
connection between a category and itself that describes only one
direction is called a simple connection.
An example of a simple connection would be one between the
Contact category and itself that is given the name "Works with". It
would be used to link together people who work together without
qualifying the relationship in the way a paired connection does.
For example, a paired connection between items in the Contact
category that expresses the same relationship could have the
names "Works for" and "Manages", indicating a staff/supervisor
relationship.
Linking items together using connections is a two-step process.
1. Set up the simple or paired connection at the database level
using the Customize-Database-Connection command. This
specifies the categories for both sides of the connection and
allocates connection controls on category detail forms.
2. Connect an item to another item by displaying an item detail
for one of the items you want to connect and choosing the
name of the other item from the connection control for the
connection to the other item's category. Each item-to-item
connection can be thought of as an instance of the simple or
paired connection.
In the case of the "Relates to" paired connection between the
Contact and History categories, an individual item in the Contact
category is linked to an item in the History category by selecting
the name of the History item in a connection control on the
Contact item. Thereafter, you can display the item detail of either
item and display the other item by selecting its name from the
connection control.
Connection controls are displayed only in an item detail. When
you create a connection definition, a connection control is
allocated automatically on every detail form of the category or
categories involved in the connection.
image/confield_shg.gif
The label above the connection control is the connection name
and contains the name of the connected category, in the case of
our example, Has History indicates a connection to the Contact
category.
The connection control shows the item name of the first
connected item in the text portion of the box (connected item
names are listed alphabetically in a connection control). The
fields displayed in the connection control can be customized
using the the Customize-Database-Connection command and
clicking the Advanced button. On the right side of a connection
control, there are three control buttons.
Use the up and down arrows 
image/connarrs_shg.gifto scroll
through the list of connected item names; there is more than one
name if one or both of the arrows is darkened . The middle
control, the connection button 
image/conndiag_shg.gif, is used
to connect and disconnect items from the connected category.
The add item button 
image/connadd_shg.gifon the extreme right
is used to add a new item to the connected category and
automatically connect it to the currently displayed item detail.
(See Dialog Box and Detail Form Keys for how to use these
controls without a mouse.)
See Connecting an Item to Another Item for detailed instructions
on using connection controls on item detail forms.
Connecting an Item to Another Item
Individual items are connected using the connection control
boxes that appear on detail forms. This procedure shows you how
to connect two items together using an existing connection
definition.
 
If an appropriate connection definition does not already exist
between the categories in which the items reside, you must add
the connection definition before starting this procedure (see
Customize-Database-Connection).
 
1. Open a view of one of the categories in the connection
definition and display an item detail of one of the items you
want to connect. The detail form chosen for the item detail
must display the connection control for the connection you
want to use to connect the items.
2. Select the connection diagram mage/conndiag_shg.gifon the
connection control labeled with the name of the connection
definition you want to use to connect the displayed item to
another item.
For example, if you wanted to connect the item in the tutorial
data's Contact category to the item in the mailingType
category that describes the various mail lists to which the
person has subscribed or shown interest, you would select the
connection diagram on the connection control labeled
Mailing/Event Type. A list box displaying the names of all the
items from the connected category appears.
3. Select the items from the list that you want to connect to the
contact item. You can select as many item names as you want.
Each time you select an item name, a check mark appears to
the left of it. The check mark indicates that a connection
instance exists between the Contact category item and the
checked item in the mailingType category.
If an appropriate item in the connected category does not exist,
you can create a new item in the connected category by
selecting the add item icon mage/connadd_shg.gifin the
connection control. The plus button may not be visible if the
connection has been designed to 'HidePlusButton' or the
button may be disabled if you do not have write (add and
modify) permissions to the category.
The buttons on the connection toolbar are as follows:
Button
Purpose
image/savechk_shg.g
if
SAVE: Press this button to save the
connection to the selected item(s).
 
 
image/connbut1_shg.
gif
SAVE AND ADD ANOTHER: Press
this button to save the connection to
the selected items and add new
connected item
 
 
image/connbut2_shg.
gif
SAVE AND EDIT HIGHLIGHTED
ITEM: Press this button to save the
connection to the selected item and
open the detail for the linked item.
 
 
image/cancel_shg.gif
CANCEL: Press this button to undo
your changes.
 
 
image/filter_shg.gif
TOGGLE THE FILTER: Press this
button to toggle between a filtered
and unfiltered list of items. The sort
order will be determined by the sort
(if any) specified in the connection
definition.
 
 
 
image/onelist_shg.gif
SHOW SINGLE LIST: Press this
button to display both connected and
unconnected items from the
connected category in one list.
 
 
image/twolists_shg.gif
SHOW TWO LISTS: Press this button
to display the connected items in the
top list, and all remaining items in the
connected category in the bottom list.
 
 
 
4. After selecting all the item names that you want from the
connected item list, select the save button on the connection
toolbar to return to the detail form.
Once you connect items to the displayed item, the connection
control displays the connected items in a list. You can scroll
through the list of connected items using the up and down
arrow buttons mage/connarrs_shg.gifto the left of the
connection diagram.
5. Select the Save or Cancel button on the detail form to return
to the view you opened in Step 1.
Detail Form Tab
The Customize-Database-Detail Form command displays the
Detail Form tab. From this tab, you can select the Add button to
add a new detail form, or highlight an existing detail form and
choose the Edit, Copy, or Delete buttons. At the bottom of the
tab, the Detail Form Description displays a description of the
highlighted form.
 
CATEGORY NAMES
This list box shows all the categories in the active database.
 
DETAIL FORM NAMES
This list box shows all the currently defined detail forms for the
selected category. Commence automatically creates a default
form called Initial Form for each newly created category. All the
fields in a category appear on the Initial Form at creation, though
you can edit the initial form like any other form.
ADD BUTTON
Selecting this button displays the Design Form dialog box. This
allows you to add a new detail form for the category.
 
EDIT BUTTON
Selecting this button displays the Design Form dialog box filled in
with the definition of the detail form highlighted in the Detail Form
Names list box. This allows you to make changes to the existing
form.
 
Shortcut: Mouse users can double-click the left mouse button
while pointing at a template name to edit it without selecting the
Edit button.
 
COPY BUTTON
Add a new form by Copying the form highlighted in the Detail
Form Names list box and saving it to a new name; choosing the
Copy button displays the Design Form dialog box.
 
DELETE BUTTON
Delete the existing form highlighted in the Detail Form Names
list box (if you have more than one); Commence asks for
confirmation before deleting the form and will not let you delete
the only form for a category.
 
SET DEFAULTS BUTTON
Set Defaults for adding and displaying items; choosing the Set
Defaults button displays the Set Default Detail Forms dialog box.
 
CLOSE BUTTON
Select Close when you are finished working with detail form
definitions.
Importing Connections
If you attempt to import data from a file, and the template you are
using maps information from the file into connection definitions in
your category, the connected data must be present in your
database, or the connections will not be made. If this occurs, a
message box telling you that connections have not been imported
is displayed at the completion of the import operation.
For example, let's say you received an exported file that contains
Project data for various customers. Let's also assume that the
exported Project category and your Project category are exactly
the same and that this file contains valid connection data for each
item in the file. Each item in the exported file, then, contains the
names of the connected items in the Person/Company category
at the time the category was exported.
In order to import this connection data, the exact same connected
items in the Person/Company category must exist in your
database, or the connections specified in the export file will be
ignored. In other words, the Projects will be imported into the
Project category, however the connection to the Person/Company
will be left blank.
To import connection data contained in an exported file, we
recommend the following procedure. We'll use the example of
importing a Project category with connection definitions to the
Person/Company category to illustrate the procedure.
1. Create two import templates:
A. one for the Person/Company category that imports the items
required for the Client Person/Company connection. This
data should contain information about the client who
contracted the project. Only fields should be mapped (and
no connections).
B. one for the Project category that imports all the project-
related fields you want including the connection to the
Person/Company category
2. Import the Person/Company category using template A above.
3. Import the Project category using template B above. During
this second import, the newly added Projects will automatically
be connected to the existing Person/company items that were
imported previously.
Note: If one or more of the connection definitions in the category
you want to import point back to the category itself, you have to
import the category twice; once to import the items (without
connections) and the second time to import the connections.
Template Definition Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you are adding, editing, or
copying an import/export template from the Import/Export dialog
box.
 
Type or edit the template name in the Template Name text box.
The name can be up to 30 characters and must be unique.
 
Choose your target category by selecting a category name from
the Category Name drop down list box.
 
You have to tell Commence three more things before you are
done defining a new import/export template:
 
1. How to read the external file. You do this by selecting a file
format from the File Format radio group.
2. Which fields you want to update in your target category and
how those fields relate to the external file. You do this by
selecting the Map button, which displays the Template
Mapping dialog box.
3. How to process incoming data with new and duplicate item
names. You do this by selecting the Import Rules button,
which displays the Import Rules dialog box.
4. How to process outgoing data to an external OLE DB/ODBC
database that may contain duplicate item names. You do
this by selecting the Export Rules button, which displays
the Export Rules dialog box.
 
Select the Save button to save your template definition. Select
Cancel to discard the template you are working on.
File Format
In order to read your external data file, Commence needs to know
how this file is formatted. Commence can read three different
formats: ASCII, dBASE, and DIF. Commence can also read/write
data directly from/to an OLE DB/ODBC database.
 
ASCII formats are very simple: each item appears on a separate
line and fields are separated by a pre-defined delimiter, such as a
comma or tab, or by having fixed column positions. Commence
supports all three of these ASCII formats: comma, tab, and
column delimited.
 
dBASE and DIF are more sophisticated file formats that include,
besides the data, descriptive information about the file's field
names, sizes and data types. Because dBASE and DIF formats
are self-describing, if you provide a sample of the file you want to
import, Commence can read the format and use that information
to help you define your import/export template.
 
In all, Commence supports seven choices of file formats: three
ASCII formats, dBASE and DIF without sample files, and dBASE
and DIF with sample files. These choices are displayed in the File
Format radio group on the Template Definition dialog box and are
described below. The default format is ASCII, comma delimited.
 
ASCII, comma delimited
Each field is separated by a comma and surrounded by quotation
marks. Each item starts on a new line. For example: "Jones,
Jim", "Red Bank, NJ","(908)530-5221"
"Sands, Sally", "New York NY","(212)226-3345"
ASCII, tab delimited
Each field is separated by a tab and surrounded by quotation
marks. Each item starts on a new line. For example: "Jones, Jim"
"Red Bank, NJ" "(908)530-5221"
"Sands, Sally" "New York NY" "(212)226-3345"
ASCII, column delimited
The fields start and end at specified positions. Each item starts
on a new line.
Jones, Jim Red Bank, NJ (908)530-5221
Sands, Sally New York, NY (212)226-3345
dBASE, sample file
dBASE IV files ending with a .DBF extension, and memos stored
in a .DBT file, are common file formats accepted and created by
many different database programs. If you have a sample dBASE
file appropriate to this category, Commence can help create your
template definition by reading the field names and the size of the
field. Commence can also do type checking on the field mapping
you define.
Note: To import a dBASE-format file that contains memo fields,
your target category must have fields that are capable of
containing the data in the dBASE file, namely text fields with a
size of Large (which holds up to 30,000 characters).
dBASE, no sample file
dBASE IV files ending with a .DBF extension, and memos stored
in a .DBT file, are common file formats accepted and created by
many different database programs.
DIF, sample file
Data Interchange Format (DIF) is a file format used primarily by
spreadsheet applications. If you have a sample DIF file
appropriate to this category, Commence can help create your
template definition by telling you how many fields are imported or
exported.
DIF, no sample file
Data Interchange Format (DIF) is a file format used primarily by
spreadsheet applications.
OLE DB/ODBC data source
Many applications support ODBC including Microsoft Access,
Oracle, and SQL.
(Edit) Authorization Defaults Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Default
Permissions... button on the Database Options dialog box. This
screen lets you set the default permissions for one or more
categories in the shared database. The default permissions are
applied to all new users when they enroll to the shared database.
A similar dialog box is displayed by pressing the Edit
Permissions... button on the Permissions dialog box. From this
screen, you can override the default permissions for any category
and choose the level of access to a category for each user
individually. The Edit Authorizations dialog box will have an
additional option of (Default) in every drop-down list to accept the
default permissions.
USER(S)
The names of the user(s) whose permissions are being modified
will be displayed here. This is only shown on the Edit
Authorizations dialog box.
DATABASE:
The name of the active shared database will be displayed here.
DEFAULT USER LEVEL
Select the default user level for the active shared database. The
choices are Author, User, or None.
CATEGORIES AND DESKTOPS
Select one or more categories or desktops from the list.
Categories are listed as Type C and desktops are listed as Type
D. The default permissions will be shown to the right of the
category name. To change the default permissions for all
categories and desktops at once, press Select All.
Note: The only permission that needs to be set for desktops
is the Read permission. When setting permissions, if the
selection includes one or more desktops, only the Read
permission may be set. For full control over all applicable
permissions, it may be helpful to sort by the Type column to
group similar objects together.
READ PERMISSION
To change the default read permission for the selected
categories or desktops, select All, Selective, or None from
the list choices.
For a category, if the read permission is set to None, the
user(s) will not receive any shared items for the selected
category. In this case, it is not necessary to set the write and
delete permissions.
WRITE PERMISSION (for CATEGORIES ONLY)
To change the default write permission for the selected
categories, select All, Selective, or None from the list
choices.
DELETE PERMISSION (for CATEGORIES ONLY)
To change the default delete permission for the selected
categories, select All, Selective, or None from the list
choices.
SAVE
Select Save to accept any changes you have made on this
screen.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to exit without saving your changes.
Assign Users to Commence Items Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Assign
Users... button on the Database Options dialog box. Selective
Permissions lets you decide which users will have access to the
items in a shared category, simply by connecting the user to the
item. If the user is not connected, they will not be able to read,
write, or delete that item.
This screen lets you select the “Person” category in your
database containing the names of all Commence users in your
workgroup. This category may be called Person, as in the Main
Database, or you may have your own custom category, such as
Employees, where only the names of Commence users are
entered.
Note: You must enter the names of all your users (Commence
clients) into your Person category before you can complete
this dialog box.
USERS
The login IDs (as they were entered in ComAdmin) of all users of
the shared database will be listed on the left side of the screen.
Select one user name at a time from the list.
PERSON ITEMS
The names of all your Commence users (as they were entered in
the Commence Person category) will be listed on the right side
of the screen. Select the one item name from the list that
matches the login ID of the user selected on the left side of the
screen.
ASSIGN PERSON
Press this button to match up the selected items on the left and
right sides of the screen. The word (none) to the right of the
login ID will be replaced by the item name of the Commence
user you selected.
UNASSIGN PERSON
Press this button to undo your selection. The word (none) will
appear to the right of the login ID.
OK
Select OK to accept any changes you have made on this screen.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to return to the Database Options dialog box
without saving your changes.
Select Connections for Selective Permissions Dialog
Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Select
Connections... button on the Database Options dialog box.
Selective Permissions lets you decide which users will have
access to the items in a shared category, simply by connecting
the user to the item. If the user is not connected, they will not be
able to read, write, or delete that item.
If you have not done so already, you must first assign users to
items in your Person category. Then on this screen, you must
choose which connection to the Person category should be used
to determine selective permissions. This is useful if you have
more than one connection to the Person category, for example
“Appointment Coordinated by Person” can be used to allow only
the person who added the Appointment item to have write and
delete permissions to the item. “Appointment With Person” can be
used to allow only the attendees (i.e., any user whose name
appears in this connection) to have read permissions to the
appointment item.
CATEGORY:
Select a shared category in the active shared database. This
category will be configured to use selective permissions.
CONNECTION FOR READ PERMISSIONS:
Select a connection to the “Person” category. Only those users
who are connected to the item via this connection will receive
the item.
CONNECTION FOR WRITE PERMISSIONS:
Select a connection to the “Person” category. Only those users
who are connected to the item via this connection will be able to
edit the item.
CONNECTION FOR DELETE PERMISSIONS:
Select a connection to the “Person” category. Only those users
who are connected to the item via this connection will be able to
delete the item.
OK
Select OK to accept any changes you have made on this screen.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to return to the Database Options dialog box
without saving your changes.
Workgroup Communications Dialog Box
This dialog is displayed when you choose the Configure button
(in the Server Communications group box) on the
Communications dialog box.
SYNCHRONIZE WITH CLIENTS VIA...
Select a method of synchronization from the list. The default
method of syncing with clients is via a shared LAN directory.
All three methods can be configured at the server. This
offers each client the most flexibility in choosing a
convenient method of synchronization. For example, on-site
users who are typically connected to a network may choose
the shared LAN method, while remote users may prefer
FTP.
EDIT
After selecting a method of synchronization, press the Edit
button to enter the communication parameters. The Server
Communication dialog box will be displayed.
CLEAR
If all your clients will be using the same method of
synchronization, and you want to ensure that no users
attempt to sync via any other method, then select the
method of syncing you no longer want to use and press the
Clear button to clear the parameters for that option.
OK
Select OK to accept any changes you have made on this
screen. Click Next to continue.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to return to the Communications dialog box
without saving your changes. Note you will be allowed to
continue only after the communications setup has been
filled out properly.
 
Registered User Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Details button
from the Register dialog box.
Use this command to get more information about the registered
user you’ve selected. The user’s Full Name, Login ID, and
Authorization Key are displayed. Other options on this screen
include:
CREATE INSTRUCTIONS
Use this command to generate an instruction sheet for the
registered user you’ve selected. The instruction sheet will
include the user’s information displayed above, and any
additional information the user will need to know to enroll to the
shared database. For more information about how to customize
the instruction sheet, see Registering Clients.
RE-REGISTER
Use this command to resend initialization information to the
selected user. This must be done if an error occurs during the
enroll process.
RESYNC
Use this command to resend database information to the user.
OK
Press the OK button to close this dialog box and return to the
Register dialog box.
Type a Correction or Select a Suggestion Dialog Box
This dialog box, displayed when you select the Suggestions
button from the Spell Checker, allows you to correct a misspelled
word found by the Tools-Spell Check command by either:
 
-- editing the text in the Correction text box, or
-- selecting an alternative spelling for the misspelled from the
Suggestions list box. If you choose a suggested spelling, it
appears in the Correction text box.
 
Once you are satisfied with the text in the Correction text box,
select one of the buttons explained below to tell the spell checker
how to perform the substitution of the new spelling for the
incorrect one.
CORRECTION TEXT BOX
This text box originally contains the misspelled word found by the
spell checker. Change its contents using the mouse and
keyboard, or by selecting one of the spell checker's suggestions
from the Suggestions list box. Use one of the buttons on the
right side of the dialog box to use the contents of the Correction
text box to replace the misspelled word or return to the Spell
Checker without correcting the word.
SUGGESTIONS LIST BOX
Lists suggested spellings for the misspelled word. Selecting one
of these suggestions places it in the Corrections text box.
HERE
Substitute the contents of the Correction box for the currently
highlighted occurrence of the word within the field being checked
by selecting the Here button from the Apply box. Commence
then highlights the next misspelled word in the field (if any). (The
currently highlighted occurrence is the one that was highlighted
when you selected the Suggestions button from the Spell
Checker dialog box.)
EVERYWHERE
Substitute the contents of the Correction box for all occurrences
of the word within the field being checked by selecting the
Everywhere button from the Apply box.
CANCEL
To leave the misspelled word unchanged, select the Cancel
button. Commence returns you to the Spell Checker dialog box,
with the highlight still on the original misspelled word.
Find Time Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Find Time
button on the Schedule Meeting dialog box. The purpose of this
dialog box is to let you choose a meeting date, start time, and end
time for the Participants you selected in the Schedule Meeting
dialog box.
 
Time slots are color coded so that you can find free time at a
glance. White space indicates a time when all selected
participants are free. Red indicates a time when at least one
required Participant is busy. Blue indicates a time when none of
the required participants are busy but at least one Optional
Participant is busy.
 
The Find Time dialog box contains these elements:
HRS/MINS
The value in these boxes determines the size of the free time slot
you want Commence to find. When you first enter the Find Time
dialog box, these boxes display the meeting duration. If you set a
Start Time and End Time in the Schedule Meeting dialog box,
Commence calculates your meeting duration and displays the
value here. If no End Time is entered, this value defaults to 30
minutes. Use these boxes to change the duration of the meeting.
DATE
When you first enter the Find Time dialog box, this text box
displays either today's date or the Date specified on the
Schedule Meeting dialog box. Either type a new date in the text
box or use the Time/Date Grid (see below) to select a date.
START TIME
When you first enter the Find Time dialog box, this text box
displays either the current time or the Start Time specified on the
Schedule Meeting dialog box. Either type a new start time in the
text box or use the Time/Date Grid (see below) to select a start
time.
END TIME
When you first enter the Find Time dialog box, this text box
displays either the End Time specified on the Schedule Meeting
dialog box or, if no End Time was specified, 30 minutes after the
Start Time. If you change the Hrs/Mins value (indicating meeting
duration), Commence recalculates the End Time.
SKIP BY DAY
Select one of these buttons to move the Time/Date Grid
backward or forward by one day.
SKIP BY SCREEN
Select one of these buttons to move the Time/Date Grid
backward or forward by 14 days.
LEGEND
Shows the colors or shades used to identify which time slots are
free for all selected participants (None), busy for at least one
Required participant (Required), and busy for at least one
Optional participant (Optional).
TIME/DATE GRID
Displays 24 time slots for each day in a 14 day period. When this
box first appears, the day displayed on the left of the grid is either
today or the day selected as the Date for the appointment on the
Schedule Meeting dialog box.
 
Click the mouse button over a single time slot. The Date, Start
Time, and End Time boxes change to reflect your selection.
OK
Select this button to confirm your choices for Date, Start Time,
and End Time and return to the Schedule Meeting dialog box.
CANCEL
Select this button to cancel the currently specified Start Time,
End Time, and Date and return to the Schedule Meeting dialog
box without making any changes.
Resources Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Resources
button on the Schedule Meeting dialog box. The purpose of this
dialog box is to connect the appointment you are scheduling to
items in your Resource category. Connecting resources serves as
a reminder to the coordinator and attendees that particular
resources are required for the meeting and must be reserved in
whatever way is appropriate for your organization.
The Name, Located in and Date/Time text is copied from the
information in the Schedule Meeting dialog box to identify the
meeting.
The Needed and Not Needed list boxes in the middle of the
dialog box, and the buttons between them, are used to build a list
of required resources for the meeting.
To add a resource to the meeting, highlight one or more
resources from the Not Needed list and select the Add button. To
remove resources from the meeting, highlight them in the Needed
list box and select the Remove button.
To highlight multiple individual items in either of the list boxes,
press and hold down the Ctrl key as you click the mouse button
over them. To highlight a range of items, highlight the first item in
the range, move the list box using the scroll bars (if necessary) to
display the item at the other end of the range, then press and
hold down the Shift key as you click the mouse button over the
last item in the range.
Select the Save button to confirm your choices. Select Cancel to
return to the Schedule Meeting dialog box without choosing
resources.
Add/Edit Remote Database Dialog Box
These dialog boxes are displayed when you select the Add or
Edit buttons on the Sync Out dialog box. The Edit Remote
Database dialog box looks the same as the Add Remote
Database dialog box, except that the name of the database you
are editing appears in the Database Name text box.
 
This dialog box lets you give a descriptive name to the remote
database you are defining. The database name you specify must
be unique within the currently defined list of names and must
have 60 characters or less. It is advisable to use a database
name that identifies both the database and the PC on which it
resides. For example, if you want to use a database named
"Sales Contacts" as a base database and have a remote
database on your home PC, then enter a name like "Sales
Contacts on Home PC". This will help you to remember which
database you currently have open and the PC for which you are
creating an update file.
 
Enter or edit the database name and select OK to confirm your
changes. Select Cancel to return to the Sync Out dialog box
without making any changes.
Creating the Initial Update File
With the Sync Out dialog box displayed, follow the procedure
below:
1. The names of your remote databases are listed in the
Synchronize with Database drop-down list box. In the Sync
Filename text box, type in (or use the Select button to
choose) a filename to hold the updates for the selected
remote database, that is, the one displayed in the
Synchronize with Database drop-down list box.
If you have more than one remote database, you must select a
different filename for each update file. Choose an update file
name that identifies the remote database. You may be
synchronizing different remote databases at different times,
so the update files can contain different information for each
remote database. Commence writes the remote database
name in the update file and will not let you update a remote
database using the wrong update file.
2. Select the OK button to create the update file. The Sync Out
message box is displayed to show you the status of the
update.
When the Sync Out is finished, the button changes to OK.
Select OK on the message box.
3. Clearly label the diskette with the name of the PC and the
remote database for which the update file was created. (The
update file may be created on any drive; it often created on a
diskette or copied to a diskette to move to a remote PC.)
Now, you are ready to initialize the remote database(s). Select
the Browse >> button to see how to do this.
Running Multiple Commence Servers on One PC
See Also
It is frequently convenient to have more than one copy of
Commence running on a single PC. The following command line
options can be used to control Commence's behavior when it first
starts.
/Database
The /Database option controls the database that Commence
opens initially. For example,
"c:\program files\commence\commence.exe" /Database=Contact
Manager
will start Commence with the Main Database and
"c:\program files\commence\commence.exe"
/Database=c:\commence\data
will start Commence with the database that is in the
c:\commence\data directory.
/Prompt
The /Prompt option causes Commence to display a list of
available database when it starts. You can then select the
database to open. For example:
"c:\program files\commence\commence.exe" /Prompt
/Quiet
If Commence is already running you will get a warning message if
you try to start another copy of Commence. Adding the /Quiet
option will suppress this warning message. For example:
"c:\program files\commence\commence.exe" /Quiet
Note: Each server MUST use a separate shared LAN or FTP
directory. Open each database and use the Customize-
Workgroup command, then press Next >> until you get to
the Communications screen. Make sure you have selected a
different shared LAN or FTP directory for each server
database. Also, if you are synchronizing via e-mail, each
server can use the same e-mail ID.
Tip For each copy of Commence you start, you will get a message
telling you that Commence is already running and asking
you if you want to start another copy. You can bypass this
message by using the /Quiet command line option. To use
it, just append “/Quiet” to the end of the command line.
Setting Server Communications
Three sets of Server Communications Settings are provided (e.g.
one for each of the available synchronizing methods.) Depending
upon the method(s) used for synchronizing updates, one or more
of these sets of parameters must be configured. The methods
available for synchronizing data are:
Shared LAN Directory - used when a Local Area Network
(LAN) is used by the Workgroup; a directory which is
accessible by both the Server and Clients is used to
distribute updated information
E–Mail - uses electronic mail to send and receive updated
information for the Shared Database
Internet FTP Directory - uses File Transfer Protocol
(FTP) commands to send and receive updated information
for the Shared Database over the Internet.
It is not necessary for all three sets of parameters to be defined if
only one or two of the methods are going to be used for the
synchronizing of data. For example, if there is no Internet
connection available to the Server, then synchronizing via the
Internet will not be possible, and those parameters may remain
undefined.
 
Perform the following procedure to define Server
Communications Settings:
1. From the Customize Workgroup - Database Options Dialog
Box, click on Next > two times. The Customize Workgroup -
Communications Dialog Box will be displayed.
2. In the Server Communications section, click Configure. The
Workgroup Communications Dialog Box will be displayed.
3. Highlight each method that will be used, in turn, and set the
parameters:
E-Mail
Internet FTP Directory
Shared LAN Directory
Setting Client Communications
Once the Commence Server has been configured properly for
each of the methods to be used for synchronizing, each Client
must in turn be configured as well. Unlike the Commence Server,
which is capable of being configured for all three means of
synchronizing (i.e. Shared LAN Directory, e–mail, and/or the
Internet), a Commence Client is capable of using only one
method of synchronizing at any given time. The choice of
synchronizing method may be changed at any point by
reconfiguring the Client Communications Parameters, but a Client
cannot be configured for multiple methods of synchronizing
simultaneously.
 
Perform the following procedure to define Client Communications
Settings:
1. From the Customize Workgroup - Database Options Dialog
Box, click on Next > two times. The Customize Workgroup -
Communications Dialog Box is displayed.
2. From the Customize Workgroup - Communications Dialog
Box, highlight a user name in the Client Communications
box and select Configure.
3. Select the method that the client will use to synchronize.
Note, only one method can be used per client.
E-Mail
Internet FTP Directory
Shared LAN Directory
Repeat for each client.
Users’ communications parameters may need to be updated if the
methods available for syncing change. For example, if a user
usually works in the office, they would typically be connected via
a shared LAN directory. If they begin using Commence on a
laptop from outside of the office, e–mail communication would
allow the Client Database to communicate with the Server even
when away from the office. The server will then need to be
reconfigured so that it sends (and receives) synchronization data
from the Client via e–mail. Additionally, the user will need to
configure the Client Database to communicate via e–mail.
Add/Edit Field Dialog Box
When you are adding, editing, or copying a category (see
Category Definition dialog box), the Add and Edit buttons on this
dialog box allow you to add new fields or modify existing fields in
the selected category.
FIELD LABEL TEXT BOX
When adding a field, this text box is blank. Type a field label into
the box that is indicative of the field's purpose. You must label a
field in order to save its definition using the OK button.
 
When editing a field, this box is filled in with the current field
label. You can change the label by editing the box's contents and
selecting the OK button.
 
Field labels are limited to 20 characters.
FIELD TYPE LIST BOX
This list box shows Commence's field types (the name field type
is omitted unless you are editing the name field).
 
When adding a field, Commence highlights the Text field type by
default. Change the type by highlighting another in the list.
 
When editing a newly added field, the current field type is
highlighted and can be changed by moving the highlight to
another field type in the list. This can be done until the field is
saved.
 
When editing a previously defined (saved) field in an existing
category, the field's type is highlighted but it cannot be changed;
this also applies to the name type field of any category.
 
Note: If you have not yet entered any data into a field and you
want to change the field type, you can delete the field and add a
new field with a different field type. If you have entered data and
want to transfer this existing data to a new field with the type you
want, use the File-Export-By Category command to export the
data values from the old field, define a new field with the type
you want, and then use File-Import to import the data values.
 
FIELD OPTIONS
The options displayed on the right side of the dialog box depend
on the field's type, so the right hand side of the Add or Edit
Field dialog box changes when you select different field types in
the Field Type list box.
 
Since each field type has special capabilities and different
definition options, consider how you will use a field before you
add or edit it.
 
The following is a list of all the available field types. To see a
definition of the capabilities of the field, select the field type
name below. To see a description of the field's options as they
appear in this dialog box, as well as an explanation of valid field
values, select the word Options next to the field type whose
options you want to see.
 
Calculation Options
Check Box Options
Data File Options
Date Options
E-mail Address Options
Excel Cell Options
Image Options
Internet Address (URL) Options
Number Options
Selection Options
Sequence Number Options
Telephone Options
Text Options
Time Options
Editing a Radio Group
There are two considerations you should bear in mind when
editing radio button definitions using the Edit Field dialog box.
 
First, you cannot delete a radio button. For example, once you
save a definition that uses five radio buttons for the Status field,
you can't go back to using only three buttons. The fourth and fifth
will have to be labeled Unused or some such name if you no
longer want to use those labels. Each button will continue to be
counted towards the total number of fields and connections used
for your category.
 
Second, while you can change the radio button's label at any
time, it is easiest to do so before you enter any data into the
category. This is because data you enter is associated with the
radio button number, not its label.
 
For example, if you have data associated with a radio button
labeled Meeting and change the label to Phone Call, any items
in the category that previously had the Meeting button turned on
will now have the Phone Call button turned on.
Icon Modification Action
The Icon Modification action draws attention to a button on the
view bar to alert you to open the view.
 
Use the View Name drop-down list box to select a view from
among the views you currently have on the view bar. View bar
buttons have two appearances: normal and alert. The alert
appearance can be used as a reminder that the view should be
examined. The icon modification action can optionally sound an
audible alarm to further alert you.
 
The icon modification action does not use values from trigger or
condition item(s).
 
An agent using a timer trigger and an icon modification action is
an easy way to periodically remind yourself to check important
data.
Item Count Condition
An Item Count condition tests whether or not there are a
specified number of data items in a category, a filtered category
or a named view. The condition can be defined to look for an
exact match to the condition count or for an item count less than
or greater than the condition count.
Select either View or Category under For Items In... to specify
the items that are checked by the condition.
If you select View, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your current views. Note that selecting a view
determines the category of the view.
If you select Category, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your categories. If you want to limit the condition
test to a sub-set of the category, use the Select Filter button to
bring up the Filters tab. Now you can define a filter for that
category.
An Item Count can be defined to look for an exact match to the
item count or a connection count less than or greater than the
condition count. Use the radio group controls under Trigger If...
to set the style of comparison. Enter the condition count in the
text box to the left of items are visible.
An Item Count condition passes all the items in its test view or
category as condition items.
Item Count conditions are useful for passing several data items
at once to an action. Remember, if you want to design an agent
that processes many items at once you should use an Item
Count condition or a Field Summary condition since triggers
only pass a single item as trigger data.
Tools Menu Commands
This menu provides access to various utilities provided by
Commence.
Outlook Sync Synchronizes data with Microsoft Outlook.
Spell Check Check the spelling of words in a text field; either the
blinking cursor or some highlighted text must be present
in the field to be checked.
Schedule Meeting Find an available meeting time for a group of
participants and then add an appointment item to the
group calendar.
Field Summary Display a summary of all the calculation and
number fields selected for summary reporting (if any) in
the active view. This command is available only if the
active view is a report.
Sync Link In Read an update file for a particular database.
 
Sync Link Out Manage remote databases in the sync link group.
 
Import Import data from an external file into a category in the
open database.
Export-By View Export data from a category in the open
database to an external file; only those items appearing in
the active view are exported.
Export-By Category Export all data from a category in the open
database to an external file.
Transfer In Read data definitions from a transfer file into the
open database.
Transfer Out Copy data definitions into a transfer file from the
open database.
 
Save Item Trigger
The Save Item trigger is fired when an item is saved in
Commence. The specification of the trigger consists of identifying
which items activate the trigger when they are saved. All Save
Item triggers work with a single category (e.g., Account, Activity,
etc.). The Save Item trigger passes data from the item that was
saved (trigger data).
 
You can specify that the trigger fires when an item is added for
the first time, when an item is edited or both. Select these options
using the added and edited check boxes to the right of An item
is in the Trigger If group box.
 
You can set a Save Item trigger for items in a view or in a
category. Make this selection by picking one of the View or
Category radio buttons under Trigger If.
 
If you select View, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your current views. Note that selecting a view
determines the category of the view.
 
If you select Category, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your categories. You can just set the alarm for any
item in the category, or you can restrict it to a filtered sub-set of
the category. Press the Select Filter button to bring up the Filters
tab and define a filter for that category.
 
Pressing the Options button allows you to qualify the type of
Save Item that has occurred. An add/edit item can occur in a
number of ways. The table below summarizes the various options
available for modifying items in Commence.
 
Option Item was added/edited via…
Detail Form -an item detail in which information was manually
entered by a Commence user
Agent -an agent using an Add Item or Edit Item action
Transfer In -Transfer In from a Commence *.TFR file
Import -Import (or the Import action in an agent) from an ASCII,
dBASE, DIF, or ODBC file
DDE -an external program or a Commence agent using
Dynamic Data Exchange
Sync Link -Sync Link In (or the Sync Link In action in an agent)
from a remote database
Workgroup -Workgroup Sync or automatic synchronization
(only available in a shared database)
Internet/Intranet -an Allure-enabled web site
Pilot Link -HotSync with a Palm handheld device
Other programs -an external add-on using the Commence
Database API or from a Commence detail form
using the Database API in a VBScript
Outlook Sync -synchronization with Microsoft Outlook
By default, the Save Item trigger assumes that the agent will fire
only if an item was manually added/edited via a detail form. Every
one of these options, including the default detail form option, can
be turned on or off independently, allowing you to custom select
the types of save to suit your needs. For example, by turning off
the agent option, you can be sure that an agent will never trigger
itself.
 
The following steps describe how to access the options in the
Save Item trigger.
1. Select Customize-Database-Agent.
2. Select Add to create a new agent.
3. Press the T button in the If this Trigger occurs: section.
This will display the Add Trigger dialog.
4. Select Save Item from the list of Trigger types.
5. Select a view or category from either combo box.
6. Press the Options… button. The Updates screen will appear.
Check as many options as needed. The agent will run
whenever an item is added or edited via the selected options.
For example, if the “Other program” option is selected, the
agent will run when an Automation client adds an item to the
selected view or category.
7. Complete the remaining selections for the agent (e.g. define
any conditions and actions as needed).
8. Save the agent.
 
Note: The options also work with existing agents that already use
the Save Item trigger. Simply edit the agent and modify the
trigger. Then press the Options button and check the appropriate
boxes as needed.
Sync Link Concepts
See Also
If you are using several PCs and are not on a LAN, you can still
maintain identical databases by using the Sync Link feature.
Sync Link provides you with the benefits of information sharing
without using a network to interconnect your PCs. Using Sync
Link, you can compress a Commence database into a single file,
and read that file into a copy of Commence running on another,
unconnected computer. Thereafter, you can keep the two copies
of the Commence database identical by sync linking the
database changes from one PC to the other as you move
between them.
 
The text under the heading Establishing a Sync link Group
explains the general procedure for defining and maintaining a set
of two or more identical databases. The section Using Sync Link
details procedures for using the sync link group and for adding,
editing, and deleting remote databases.
Establishing a Sync link Group
A sync link group consists of two or more Commence databases,
usually located on different, unconnected computers.
Establishing a sync link group allows you to exchange files
between the databases in the sync link group and keep the
contents of the databases identical, or synchronized, as work
and travel take you from computer to computer. The following
diagram depicts a typical sync link group scenario.
 
image/synclink_shg.gif
 
Using Sync Link to update databases is much more efficient than
backing up and restoring entire databases. After the initial
synchronization (which occurs during the establishment of the
sync link group), only the changes are sync linked from PC to
PC.
Steps to Establish a Sync link Group
Before you can use Sync Link to synchronize databases, you
must define your sync link group, create the remote databases
on your remote PCs, and then populate the remote databases
with the information in the base database. The general
procedure is as follows:
1. Open the database that you want to sync link between
computers. This database will be the base database for the
sync link group.
2. With the base database open, define one or more remote
databases for the sync link group.
3. Create an initial update file for each of the remote databases.
This is called a "complete update" since it consists of all
definitions and data in your base database.
4. For each remote, add the new remote database on the
remote PC and read in the update file you created. This
makes the base and the remote databases identical.
 
 
 
 
 
Defining the Sync link Group
Before beginning, decide which PC you want to use as the base.
Select whichever PC you use most frequently. If the data is not
already on the base PC, copy the data directory to the base PC
and use File-Open/Manage Database to add that database to
Commence. Then follow these steps:
margin-bottom: 6.00pt;
text-indent: -18.00pt;">1. Start Commence on the PC you
want to use as your base, and open the database that you want
to sync link. This database will be your base database.
If this database is not opened automatically when you start
Commence, use the Open/Manage Database
command to open it.
2. Select the Tools-Sync Link Out command. The Sync Out
dialog box
is displayed. It should be empty. This dialog box lets you define
the remote PCs that will be in your sync link group. There should
not be any databases defined in the Synchronize with Database
list box. If there are, you should follow the steps in the section
Adding Another Remote Database in the description of the Sync
Out dialog box.
3. Select the Add
button from the Define Remote Database
group box. The Add Remote Database
dialog box is displayed. This dialog box lets you give a descriptive
name to the remote database you are defining. The database
name you specify must be unique within the currently defined list
of names and must have 60 characters or less.
It is advisable to use a database
name that identifies both the database and the PC on which it
resides.
For example, if you want to use a database named "Sales
Contacts"
as a base database and have a remote database on your home
PC, then enter a name like "Sales Contacts on Home PC". This
will help you
to remember which database you currently have open and the PC
for which you are creating an update file. Select OK.
A dialog box will appear while Commence initializes the database
in preparation for the first sync link out. As soon as the
initialization is finished, you will be returned to the Sync Out
dialog box.
4. The Sync Type should be set to Incremental. Because
you have added a new remote database, Commence will
automatically detect that an initial sync file containing the
entire database must be created. Do not
select OK yet.
Now, you are ready to create the initial update file.
Select the Browse >> button to see how to do this.
 
 
 
 
Initializing Remote Databases
Perform the following procedure for all of the remote databases in
the sync link group:
1. Open Commence on the PC on which the remote database is
to be located.
2. Create a new, empty database by using the Open/Manage
Database command and selecting the Add button. You can
give this database any name you wish, but to prevent
confusion, you may want to use the same name that you
gave to the base database when you defined the sync link
group.
3. Insert the update diskette intended for this remote database
into your diskette drive. (The update file may exist on any
drive, but is commonly on a diskette.)
4. Select the Sync Link In command. The Select File dialog box
is displayed.
5. Select the name of the update file in the Files list box that
matches the one you selected for this database's Sync
Filename in step 1 of the procedure for creating the initial
update files above. Then select OK.
6. The Sync In message box is displayed to show you the
status of the update.
When the Sync In finishes, the button changes to OK. Select
OK on the message box.
Now, you are ready to use the sync link group you've established.
Select the Browse >> button to see how to do this.
Using the Sync link Group
See Also
This section describes a common scenario for using your sync
link group. It assumes that you have a base database called
Sales and two remote databases: "Sales on Home PC" and
"Sales on Laptop". This scenario also assumes that you have
followed the steps in the section Sync Link Concepts and have
initialized both of your remote databases.
1. You are using your base database and are about to leave for
a business trip. Just before closing Commence, you select
Sync Link Out to create an incremental update of your
database to take with you on your laptop.
2. Select the database named "Sales on Laptop" from the
Synchronize with Database drop-down list box and make
sure that the Sync Type radio button is set to Incremental,
which is the default. Enter a name for the update file in the
Sync Filename text box. If you selected a diskette drive for
the file, make sure that there is a diskette in the diskette
drive. Then select OK.
Commence creates the incremental update file for the Sales
database on your laptop PC. This file only contains the
changes you have made since the last time you
synchronized your Sales on Laptop database.
3. On your laptop PC, start Commence and open the Sales
database.
4. Select Sync Link In and select the filename that contains
your incoming updates. Then select OK.
Commence applies all of the updates from your base database
to your remote database. When the synchronization is
finished, this database is identical to your base database.
If you made any changes to your "Sales on Laptop" database
during your trip, you would perform the same sequence of steps
when you return, this time from your laptop and to your base PC.
After you have re-synchronized with your base PC, you can follow
the same steps to create an update file for your other remote
database, "Sales on Home PC." Then you can take this file home
and synchronize your home PC so that it is identical to the others.
Some important things to remember:
You must perform a Complete update (from the Base
database) the first time you add a new remote database to a
sync link group (see the following section). After you do this,
you need only perform Incremental updates between
databases in the sync link group.
If a diskette containing an update file becomes unreadable,
or you otherwise lose the update file, you will need to go
back to the last PC you used and perform a File-Sync Link
Out with the Sync Type radio button set to Complete. This
file, like the one you first created on the base database, is a
complete copy of the database. After you read it into the
targeted database, you can use an Incremental update file
again.
Update files are targeted for a particular database in a sync
link group. After you establish a sync link group, Commence
will not let you read an update file into the wrong database.
If you cancel a synchronization in progress, you must restart
the synchronization from the same update file if you want to
continue using the open database without any loss of data.
Alternatively, you could go back to the database from which
you created the update file and create a new complete (not
incremental) update file for the open database.
Restore Database Dialog Box
The Restore Database dialog box is displayed while the
database is being restored. If you select the Cancel button to
cancel the backup, nothing is written to the database directory
you specified. Once the backup is complete, select the OK button
from the Restore Database dialog box to return to the
Open/Manage Database dialog box.
 
Restore will read from multiple floppy diskettes if the backup file
spans diskettes. Commence will prompt you for additional
diskettes as needed.
Template Mapping Dialog Box
See Also
After selecting a file format for a template on the Template
Definition dialog box, you must tell Commence which fields in
your target category correspond (or "map") to the fields in the
external file.
 
To define your field mapping, select the Map button on the
Template Definition dialog box. Commence displays the Template
Mapping dialog box, the contents of which depend on whether or
not you are using a sample file, which is an option for dBASE and
DIF file formats.
 
If you are not using a sample file, you must select field names
from your target category in the same order that the fields appear
in the external file.
 
If you are using a sample file, Commence will give you a list of
the external field names so you can match each external name
with the corresponding field in your target category; Commence
then puts the fields in the correct order for you.
 
The following help topics discuss template mapping without and
with sample files.
 
Template Mapping Without Sample Files
Discusses using the three ASCII file formats; the dBASE, no
sample file format; and, the DIF, no sample file format.
 
Template Mapping With Sample Files
Pertains to the dBASE, sample file format; the DIF, sample file
format; and, the OLE DB/ODBC data source format..
 
The process of mapping fields is identical for import and export
with three exceptions.
 
1. A special <Skip Field> entry appears in the Fields Not in
Template list box. This is used as a placeholder when
mapping templates without a sample file. It instructs
Commence to disregard the field data in that position of the
import file. When you are importing data or exporting using a
sample external file, the <Skip Field> does the same
function as the Unassign Field button; it clears the selected
field mapping causing Commence to skip over that field
during the import/export.
2. There is no need to set Import Rules when a template will
only be used for exporting data from a category. Export
Rules apply only to OLE DB/ODBC exports.
3. Exporting a sequence number or calculation field may be
useful, but these values cannot be imported since those field
values are automatically generated and/or computed by
Commence.
Setting up Windows Telephony
See Also
Select the Edit-Preferences-Dialer command to tell Commence
what type of dialer you are using. If you select Windows
Telephony as the dialing device, you can specify default dialer
settings for a modem connected to your PC. This will enable
Commence to autodial a phone number from your PC.
 
1. Select the Control Panel button on the Dialer preferences
tab. This will run the Telephony applet in Windows Control
Panel.
2. The Telephony Properties dialog box will be displayed.
Select the appropriate telephony driver for your modem. You
will typically be given a choice of “Unimodem Service
Provider”. If the manufacturer of your dialing device has
supplied you with a TAPI Service provider (*.TSP) file, it will
be listed here after it has been properly installed.
3. Select the Setup button, then press Properties. The
Modems Properties dialog box will be displayed. Select the
correct communications Port and Speed for your modem and
configuration. Click OK.
4. Select the Dialing Properties button. Select “Default
Location” or press New to add a new location.
Enter your local area code (e.g. “908” for central New
Jersey). Select the Country you are dialing from (e.g. “United
States of America (1)” if you are in the United States).
If dialing through a PBX enter the appropriate prefixes to
access an outside line. Typically, you would enter “9,” for
both local and long distance calls. Otherwise, leave both
boxes blank. Click OK to save the dialing properties for this
location.
5. Click Close to save the data.
 
Note: You will have to close Commence and restart it for Control
Panel changes to take effect.
 
Once you have setup your dialing device you can use the Tools-
Dial Phone command or the Dial button on the Home menu to
dial any phone number displayed in the active view or item detail:
 
Note: Windows Telephony (TAPI) is a built-in component of
Microsoft Windows.
Configuring E-Mail Client
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Edit-
Preferences-Other Apps command.
 
This preference allows you to configure your Commence
database to receive e-mail.
 
The Commence agent trigger Incoming Communication: E-Mail
can detect when you receive new E-Mail. It can then perform
actions on the e-mail such as deleting the mail message, marking
it as Read, or do any number of other agent actions such as
adding the e-mail message as a new item in Commence.
 
Before Commence can detect that you have new e-mail, you
must first configure Commence as an E-Mail client. To do so:
1. From the Configure Commence as: combo box, select E-
Mail client.
2. From the Mail Program: combo box, select the appropriate
protocol for your E-Mail application. For example, if you use
Lotus cc:Mail, select Lotus cc:Mail or VIM compatible (16-
bit). If you use MS Outlook or another MAPI application such
as Eudora, select MS Outlook or MAPI-compatible (32-bit).
3. If you selected VIM compatible, you must also fill in the
location of your Post Office Path. For Lotus Notes, enter the
directory where VIM.DLL or VIM32.DLL can be found.
4. Enter your e-mail User Name and Password. (If you are
using MS Outlook, enter your Profile Setting instead. The
default is usually ‘Microsoft Outlook’.) . Re-enter the
password in the Verify Password box.
5. When completed, select Done to save the configuration.
Configuring Mobile Link and Microsoft Outlook
See Also
Commence can synchronize data with supported handheld
devices and also with Microsoft Outlook.
 
Use the Preference screens in Commence to match each field in
Commence with the corresponding field in the other application.
These field mappings will be used during the synchronizations to
ensure that the correct data is stored in the appropriate field in
each application. Only those fields that will be used need to be
mapped.
 
Refer to the following topics for detailed steps:
Mapping fields for Mobile Link and Microsoft Outlook Calendar
Mapping fields for Mobile Link and Microsoft Outlook Contacts
Mapping fields for Mobile Link and Microsoft Outlook Tasks
Mapping fields for Mobile Link Notes
 
MOBILE LINK SYNCHRONIZATION
You can begin to use Mobile Link once you have completed the
mappings for your Commence database. For more details about
how to use Mobile Link, please see the Mobile Link Guide
(mobilelink.pdf) provided with your downloaded software.
 
OUTLOOK SYNCHRONIZATION
Step 1
To use the Outlook synchronization feature, Outlook must be
installed on the same PC as Commence RM. Outlook should be
setup using either of the following options:
Corporate Workgroup: provides full MAPI compliance
Internet Mail Only: provides services to connect to an Internet
Service Provider (ISP).
To determine which setup option is installed, startup Outlook then
select Help -> About Microsoft Outlook.
 
Step 2
Commence must also be configured as a MAPI 32-bit E-Mail
client. This will enable Commence to access Outlook without
prompting for your login information each time a synchronization
with Outlook is initiated. Refer to Configuring E-Mail for detailed
setup information.
 
Step 3
Before your first synchronization with Outlook, please backup
your data both in Commence and in Microsoft Outlook. Refer to
the Microsoft Office Integration Guide (msoffice.pdf) for more
information about how to prepare your database for
synchronization with Outlook.
 
 
Log In to Server Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Open button on
the Open/Manage Database dialog box if your Administrator has
required a Login Password for the shared database you are
opening.
LOGIN ID
Type in the Login ID you were assigned by the Commence
Administrator.
LOGIN PASSWORD
Type in your Login Password. The characters you type for your
password are echoed to the screen as a series of asterisks to
maintain the privacy of your password.
Note: Only the Commence Administrator can change your Login
Password.
SAVE LOGIN ID ON DISK
The Save Login ID on disk check box tells Commence to
remember your Login ID and automatically supply it whenever
you open a shared database. If you turn on this check box, the
next time you open this shared database, Commence will
display your Login ID in the edit box and you will have to type in
only your Login Password.
OK
Select OK to open the shared database.
Using Field Codes in Templates
See Also
By using Field Codes, you can insert values from a data item into
your letter. For example, if you have chosen to associate a
template with the Person/Company category, you can use values
from any direct field or connected field in the Person/Company
category in the template. When the template is used to send a
letter to a specific person, the Field Codes are replaced with the
actual values from the person's data item.
 
The format for field codes depends on the word processor that is
configured.
WORD 2000/XP
Field Codes use Word formatting and field code formats for
additional functionality. The Microsoft Office Integration Guide
(msoffice.pdf) includes more details on the use of Field Codes in
Word 2000 and XP.
WordPerfect
Field Codes are simply the name of the field enclosed in
parentheses and percent characters: (%Field Name%). For
example, to insert the name of the item in the letter, the field
variable (%Name%) would be used in the template. Data from
connected fields can also be represented with Field Codes. The
general format for a connected field is :
 
(%Connection%%Connected Category%%Field Name%)
 
For example, in a template for the Person/Company category, you
can use the following Field Code: (%Has
%%Notes/History%%Notes%). This represents the notes field in
the Notes/History category.
 
Note: If a formatted template references a connected field and
multiple items are connected to the data item for which a letter is
being written, data from all the connected items is entered into
the letter. Each connected item field is added on a separate line.
For example, if you specify a connection of
(%For%%Opportunity%Name%) in a letter template and this
letter template is used to send a letter to a person that is
connected to two opportunities, then fields from both connected
items will be inserted into the letter, one field per line. The fields
for each connected item appear in the order you specify in the
template, but the order in which the connected items are
displayed is determined by Commence.
Using Field Codes in Actions
See Also
Using Field Codes, you can insert values from the trigger or
condition item into your action specifications.
For example, if you have chosen to use a trigger item from the
Person/Company category in a Status Bar Message action, you
can use values from any field in that category in the action
specification. Thus you could display the name of a Person or
Company item in the status bar message.
The concept here is the same as that used in a letter template.
You define a letter template including Field Codes from a
particular category. When the template is used to create a letter
to a specific person, the Field Codes are replaced with the actual
values from the person's data item. The same kind of substitution
process happens when an agent operates. The agent definition
(in particular the action specifications) determines which
substitutions take place when the agent operates.
You can use a value from the trigger or condition item(s) in any
text field in an action specification. This includes Status Bar
Message text, Message Box text, text field values for Add Item
and Edit Item items, Application Launch command lines and
Send DDE messages. In all cases, inserting a Field Code in the
action specification will cause a field value substitution when the
agent operates.
Field Codes are simply the name of the field enclosed in
parentheses and percent characters: (%Field Name%). For
example, to use the name from an item in the text of a status line
action, the Field Code (%Name%) would be inserted in the text. If
you know the field names available from the trigger or condition
data you have chosen, you can just type in the Field Code.
However, it is easier and probably less error prone to select the
Field Codes from a list. You can display this list by selecting the
Insert Field button on an action specification. The list includes all
the fields that are available for the trigger or condition item being
used for that action.
If you have selected a trigger item from all categories, the Insert
Field button is not shown since Commence doesn't know the
category of the item that will be passed. However, you can still
type in Field Codes manually. If the Field Codes correspond to
fields in the trigger item passed when the agent fires, the value
will be substituted. For example, virtually all categories have a
Name field, so the Field Code (%Name%) usually produces a
useful value.
There are four special Field Codes that can be used with any
category. The (-Date-) Code will generate the current date (that is
the date at the time the agent operates). Similarly, the (-Time-)
Field Code will generate the current time. The (-Category-) Field
Code will insert the name of the category of the trigger or
condition item.
The (-TrigItemName-) Field Code is resolved to the item name of
the trigger item. If there is no trigger item, then the keyword
translates to a zero length string. This keyword is useful when
you want to create an agent that uses the trigger item name and
values of the condition item fields in the action. To do this, select
Condition 1 or Condition 2 in the Using Values From radio
group of the Add/Edit Action dialog box. Then select the Field
Values button to display the Field Values dialog box. You can
use the keyword (-TrigItemName-) in the Value text box along
with field names from the condition category.
For example, you can create an agent that has a Person item as
a trigger, with a condition
to select all overdue To-Dos. The action can delegate all of these
To-Dos to the highlighted person by selecting the Assigned to
Person connection and typing "(-TrigItemName-)" into the Value
text box.
If you are using an Add Item or Edit Item action, then Date fields
can be edited using Field Codes. You can also enter dates like
"Today" or "Next Monday" in a data item date field within an
action. When the agent operates, the appropriate date will be
entered into the fields. You can also use the dates from the
trigger or condition item(s) by inserting Field Codes for the date
field that you want to reference. Finally, you can even combine
date Field Codes with date operations to create new dates. For
example: "5 days from (%StartDate%)" will create a date that is 5
days after the date in the "Start Date" field of the trigger item.
The Agent Bar
The agent tool bar is reserved for displaying user-selected
buttons for tool bar agents. You can add your own buttons to the
tool bar by defining an agent with a Tool Bar Pick trigger; see
Customize-Database-Agent.
Help-Context-Sensitive
Use this command to access Commence's on-line help system for
help on a specific menu command or screen region without going
through the Help-Index command.
 
Context-sensitive help lets both keyboard and mouse users get help
on a specific command or screen region.
 
Context-sensitive help is available:
 
for menu commands and screen regions
for dialog boxes and message boxes
Getting Help on Menu Commands and Screen Regions
If there is no active dialog or message box, keyboard and mouse
users access context-sensitive help as described in the next two
subsections.
MOUSE USERS
If you have a mouse connected to your computer, you can get help
on menu commands and screen regions by:
 
Hover over the command with your mouse
Press SHIFT+F1
 
When you point at a screen object (such as a button on the
command bar) and then click Shift+F1, Commence displays a help
topic that explains the object or command.
 
Exit the help topic by selecting ALT+F4 or File-Close from the help
screen's menu bar.
Getting Help on Dialog and Message Boxes
If a dialog or message box is displayed, press F1 or SHIFT-F1 to
display a help topic from the Commence Help System that
describes the dialog box or message box (including error
messages) in detail. Exit the help topic by selecting ALT+F4 or File-
Close from the help screen's menu bar.
Day Display Mode
The Day display mode provides:
DAY TITLES
Day titles are displayed at the top of the daily calendar just
above the graphical display of time slots. Day titles are
appointments or events that are scheduled for a day but do not
have a start or end time. An example or a day title is
"Anniversary". An arrow immediately to the right of the day title
shows that there are more day titles for the day being
displayed.
MONTHLY CALENDARS
The mini-month calendars are displayed on the right side of a
calendar view. The current monthly calendar display changes
as you change the display using the calendar controls on the
Calendar Tool Bar. The active date is framed in a small
rectangle. The calendar weeks are arranged according to the
preference you set for the beginning day of the week using the
Edit-Preferences command and clicking on the Calendar tab.
LEGEND
A small window that explains the color coding scheme used in
the busy bars. You can toggle the display of the legend by
selecting the Legend button on the Calendar Tool Bar or by
selecting the Customize-Design View command, selecting the
Color tab, and marking the Show Legend checkbox. You can
change the color coding scheme used by a calendar view by
selecting a different color coding template on the Color tab
dialog box. You can create new color coding templates using
the Customize-Database command and selecting the Color
Code tab.
Appointment Controls
The rest of the day calendar displays appointments that are
scheduled for particular start times. The daily calendar shows as
many appointments as can fit in the current window size. If you
make the window larger, the number of time slots displayed
increases with the window size.
 
TIME SLOTS
Time intervals are labeled in this column by their start time. You
can change the interval between time slots, and the time
displayed in the top-most slot using the Customize-Design
View command and then selecting the Display tab; The time is
displayed in the format you set through the Windows Control
Panel. The number of time slots displayed depends with on the
window size (See above).
 
ITEM NAME SLOTS
The fields that are displayed for a scheduled item can be
changed using the Customize-Design View command and
selecting the Fields tab. These fields are displayed in the slot
corresponding to the start time of the item. To display the item
detail for an item in a time slot in Day display mode, double-
click the mouse on the item name.
SCROLL BAR
Allows you to browse through the items not in the currently
displayed time interval. Use the arrows and box in the scroll bar
to move through the day's scheduled items. You can also use
the Page Up and Page Down keys for the same purpose.
Using Appointments with Day Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in Day display mode.
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar is equivalent to double clicking the
mouse button on an item.
Adding Appointments
Double click on a time slot. Commence displays the Add Item
screen with the Date and Start Time set to the date and start
time you selected. 
For example, if you double click on the
5:00pm time slot for Tuesday, 5/6/09, the Date will be set to
5/6/09 and the Start Time will be set to 5:00 p.m. To change
one or both values, type over the information in the appropriate
edit box.
 
To add a Day Title (an appointment with no start or end time),
double click in the blank slot located at the top of the calendar
below the Date Toolbar. The Start Time will default to the
current system time; clear this value so that both the start and
end times are blank.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your
calendar. If you drop the item over a time slot, it will be
scheduled for that time slot. If you drop it over an area without a
time, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence will
automatically connect the newly added appointment to the item
you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for more
information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in a time slot in the Day
display mode, double-click the mouse on the item name, or
highlight the time slot and press the Enter key. If multiple items
are scheduled for the same time slot, the Select Item dialog box
is displayed from which you select the item name of the item
you want to display.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day or time
slot. To move an appointment using the keyboard, highlight the
item and select the Edit-Edit Item command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day or time slot. To
copy an appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and
select the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or highlight the item and select the Edit-Delete Item
command, the Delete button on the tool bar, or the Delete key.
Two Days Display Mode
Two days display mode shows as many of the day's items as
possible for the current day of the week and the next day. If a day
has more items than can be displayed in the window size, a down
arrow appears at the bottom right corner of the day's rectangle.
You can re-size the window to display more items per day.
 
To switch to the a different display mode of the Calendar view,
click the right mouse button over the day's date. Choose Display
Mode from the right-click menu that appears, then select another
display mode from the list. You can also left click on Display
mode drop-down list on the calendar tool bar.
 
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting a date and pressing the
Space Bar will switch to the day display mode. From there you
can select any item on that day.
Using Appointments with Two Days Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in 2 days display
mode.
Adding Appointments
Double click the mouse on any blank space within the day
rectangle. An Add Item screen is displayed.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your two
day calendar, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence will
automatically connect the newly added appointment to the item
you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for more
information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in the 2 day calendar,
double-click the mouse on the item name, or highlight the item
name and press the Enter key.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day. If you
drop it on a time slot in day mode, Commence will change its
start time as well as its date. If you drop it on a date, its start
time remains the same. To move an appointment using the
keyboard, highlight the item and select the Edit-Edit Item
command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day. To copy an
appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and select
the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or double click on the item to display the Item
Detail, and then select Edit-Delete Item command or the Delete
button on the tool bar.
Week Display Mode
Week display mode shows as many of the day's items as possible
for each day of the week in which the active date occurs. If a day
has more items than can be displayed in the current window size,
a down arrow appears at the bottom right corner of the day's
rectangle. Click the arrow to switch to the day display mode
where more items can be displayed. You can re-size the window
to display more items per day.
 
To switch to another display mode of the Calendar view, click the
right mouse button over the day's date. Choose Display Mode
from the right-click menu that appears, then select another
display mode from the list. You can also left click on Display
mode drop-down list on the calendar tool bar.
 
Using Appointments with Week Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in Week display
mode.
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar will switch to the day display mode. From
there you can select any item on that day.
Adding Appointments
Double click the mouse on any blank space within the day (or
week) rectangle. An Add Item screen is displayed.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your
weekly calendar, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence will
automatically connect the newly added appointment to the item
you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for more
information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in the Week display mode,
double-click the mouse on the item name, or highlight the item
name and press the Enter key.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day. If you
drop it on a time slot in day mode, Commence will change its
start time as well as its date. If you drop it on a date, its start
time remains the same. To move an appointment using the
keyboard, highlight the item and select the Edit-Edit Item
command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day. To copy an
appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and select
the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or double click on the item to display the Item
Detail, and then select Edit-Delete Item command or the Delete
button on the tool bar.
Two Weeks Display Mode
Two Weeks display mode shows as many of the day's items as
possible for each day of the current and the next week in which
the active date occurs. If a day has more items than can be
displayed in the current window size, a down arrow appears at
the bottom right corner of the day's rectangle. You can re-size the
window to display more items per day.
 
To switch to another display mode of the Calendar view, click the
right mouse button over the day's date. Choose Display Mode
from the right-click menu that appears, then select another
display mode from the list. You can also left click on Display
mode drop-down list on the calendar tool bar.
 
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar will switch to the day display mode. From
there you can select any item on that day.
Using Appointments with Two Weeks Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in 2 Weeks display
mode.
Adding Appointments
Double click the mouse on any blank space within the day (or
week) rectangle. An Add Item screen is displayed.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your
weekly calendar, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence will
automatically connect the newly added appointment to the item
you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for more
information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in the 2 Weeks display
mode, double-click the mouse on the item name, or highlight
the item name and press the Enter key.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day. If you
drop it on a time slot in day mode, Commence will change its
start time as well as its date. If you drop it on a date, its start
time remains the same. To move an appointment using the
keyboard, highlight the item and select the Edit-Edit Item
command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day. To copy an
appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and select
the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or double click on the item to display the Item
Detail, and then select Edit-Delete Item command or the Delete
button on the tool bar.
Month Display Mode
Month display mode shows as many of the day's items as
possible for each day of the month in which the active date
occurs. If a day has more items than can be displayed in the
current window size, a down arrow appears at the bottom of the
day's rectangle. Click the arrow to switch to the day display mode
where more items can be displayed. Alternatively you can re-size
the window to display more items per day.
 
To switch to a day Calendar view, click the left mouse button over
a date and then select another display mode from the tool bar
drop down list.
 
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar will switch to the day display mode. From
there you can select any item on that day.
Using Appointments with Month Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in Month display
mode.
Adding Appointments
Double click the mouse on any blank space within the day (or
week) rectangle. An Add Item screen is displayed.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your
monthly calendar, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence
will automatically connect the newly added appointment to the
item you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for
more information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in the Month display mode,
double-click the mouse on the item name, or highlight the item
name and press the Enter key.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day. If you
drop it on a time slot in day mode, Commence will change its
start time as well as its date. If you drop it on a date, its start
time remains the same. To move an appointment using the
keyboard, highlight the item and select the Edit-Edit Item
command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day. To copy an
appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and select
the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or double click on the item to display the Item
Detail, and then select Edit-Delete Item command or the Delete
button on the tool bar.
Six Weeks Display Mode
Six Weeks display mode shows as many of the day's items as
possible for each day the next six weeks, starting with the current
week in which the active date occurs. If a day has more items
than can be displayed in the current window size, a down arrow
appears at the bottom of the day's rectangle. You can re-size the
window to display more items per day.
 
To switch to a day Calendar view, click the left mouse button over
a date and then select another display mode from the tool bar
drop down list.
 
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar will switch to the day display mode. From
there you can select any item on that day.
Using Appointments with Six Weeks Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in 6 Weeks display
mode.
Adding Appointments
Double click the mouse on any blank space within the day (or
week) rectangle. An Add Item screen is displayed.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your 6
week calendar, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence will
automatically connect the newly added appointment to the item
you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for more
information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in the 6 Weeks display
mode, double-click the mouse on the item name, or highlight
the item name and press the Enter key.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day. If you
drop it on a time slot in day mode, Commence will change its
start time as well as its date. If you drop it on a date, its start
time remains the same. To move an appointment using the
keyboard, highlight the item and select the Edit-Edit Item
command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day. To copy an
appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and select
the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or double click on the item to display the Item
Detail, and then select Edit-Delete Item command or the Delete
button on the tool bar.
Grid Display Mode
Grid mode allows you to see the items in the calendar for a
particular day in a columnar format based on the time of the item
and a connection to the item. For example, you can set up your
calendar grid mode to show all the appointments that are
connected to you and up to 7 other people (for a total of 8).
 
Using Appointments with Grid Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in Grid display mode.
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar is equivalent to double clicking the
mouse button on an item.
Adding Appointments
Double click on an empty time slot. Commence displays the
Add Item screen with the Date and Start Time set to the date
and start time you selected and will automatically be connected
to the item at the top of the column. For example, if you double
click on Tuesday, 5/6/97, at 5:00 p.m., the Date will be set to
5/6/97 and the Start Time will be set to 5:00 p.m. To change
one or both values, type over the information in the appropriate
edit box.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your
calendar. If you drop the item over a time slot, it will be
scheduled for that time slot and connected to the item shown at
the top of the column. Commence will automatically connect the
newly added appointment to the item you copied from another
category. See Drag and Drop for more information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in a time slot in the Day
display mode, double-click the mouse on the item name, or
highlight the time slot and press the Enter key. If multiple items
are scheduled for the same time slot, the Select Item dialog box
is displayed from which you select the item name of the item
you want to display.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move an appointment drag the item to another day or time
slot. To move an appointment using the keyboard, highlight the
item and select the Edit-Edit Item command.
To copy an appointment hold down the Crtl key when you
select the item and drag the item to another day or time slot. To
copy an appointment using the keyboard, highlight the item and
select the Edit-Copy Item command.
See Drag and Drop for more information.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment drag the item to the Delete button on
the tool bar or highlight the item and select the Edit-Delete Item
command, the Delete button on the tool bar, or the Delete key.
Year Display Mode
The Year display mode shows all the dates for the active year by
displaying twelve monthly calendars. If you re-size the year mode
window, the calendar will re-size also. To switch to a day
Calendar view, double click the right mouse button over the day's
date. You can also click the left mouse button over a date and
then select another display mode from the drop down list on the
tool bar.
Using Appointments with Year Display Mode
This section describes how to add, view, move, copy, edit and
delete appointments using a Calendar view in Year display mode.
Note: For keyboard users, highlighting an item or date and
pressing the Space Bar is equivalent to double clicking the
mouse button on an item.
Adding Appointments
Double click the mouse on the date to display the Calendar
Items dialog box. Then select the Add button on the dialog box
to display an Add Item screen.
Note: To add an appointment to your calendar regardless of the
calendar mode: Enter Ctrl + A or select the Add button on the
tool bar.
Drag an item from a view of any other category over your yearly
calendar, it will be added as a Day Title. Commence will
automatically connect the newly added appointment to the item
you copied from another category. See Drag and Drop for more
information.
Viewing and Editing Appointments
To display the item detail for an item in the Year display mode
double click on the date to display the Calendar Items dialog
box, from which you select the item name of the item you want
to display and then select the Edit button in the dialog box.
Moving and Copying Appointments
To move or copy an appointment double click on the date to
display the Calendar Items dialog box. Then highlight the item
and then select the Edit button in the dialog box.
Deleting Appointments
To delete an appointment double click on the date to display the
Calendar Items dialog box. Then highlight the item and then
select the Delete button in the dialog box.
Form Properties Dialog Box
This dialog box, accessed by selecting Edit-Properties on the
Design Detail Form dialog box, allows you to set attributes for the
active tab page of the detail form.
 
A form that has been created by Commence (i.e., one delivered
with Commence or one created by Commence for a new
category) will be set up to use the default form options.
 
CAPTION
Change the tab label by typing in a new description into the
Caption text box.
 
FONTNAME
To change the font style for the tab label, click the button next to
the FontName property. You can change the font, font size, font
style (bold, italic, etc.), color, or effects (underline, etc.) all from
this screen.
 
FONTSIZE
The font size for the tab label is easily set using the FontName
property. If the specific font size you want is not available when
setting the FontName property, you can override the size setting
by manually entering the point size in this box. (e.g. 8.25)
 
BACKCOLOR
The Background Color box lets you reset the color of the form's
background using virtually any color available on your PC. Click
the ellipse button and a color palette will be displayed. Choose a
system color based on your Windows Control Panel settings, or
choose a basic color from the palette. If the desired color is not
shown, it may be created by selecting the Define Custom
Colors >> button from the color palette. This color will be used
everywhere there isn't a label or a field. Select Apply to save
your changes and return to the Design Detail Form dialog box.
 
You can also customize the tab pages of a form by adding,
editing, and deleting tabs. See Working with Detail Form Tabs for
more information.
Customize-Design View-Fields Tab (Report and Grid
Views)
See Also
Selecting the Customize-Design View command while a report or
grid view is the active view displays the Design View tab.
Use the Fields tab to choose the fields to appear in the view and
set field options as explained below. If you select a connection
name to appear in the view, you can choose a field from the
connected category. The available options on the Fields tab for a
Report Viewer differ slightly.
The Fields in Report and Fields Not In Report list boxes show
the list of fields (including connection definitions) that appear in
the view and those that don't appear in the view, respectively.
The Fields in Report list box displays field names in the order in
which the fields appear in the view.
To append a field to the list of fields in the view (making the new
field the last field listed in the view), highlight the field name in the
Fields Not In Report list box and select the Append Field
button.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields Not In
Report list box to append it to the Fields In Report list without
selecting the Append Field button.
To insert a field into the list of fields in the view, highlight a field
name in the Fields Not In Report list box and highlight the
position where you want the field inserted in the Fields In Report
list box. Then, select the Insert Field button.
If the field you select is a connection definition, you can choose to
display any of the fields from the connected item in the view. For
example, you could show the name and phone number of each
person assigned to a To-Do item by highlighting Assigned to
Person in the Fields Not In Report list box and selecting either
the Insert Field or Append Field button. Commence displays a
list box containing the list of fields in the connected category.
Select the name and phone number fields, one field at a time,
from the list. Note that connection definitions in the connected
category are not displayed in the list box. You can only display
items that are directly connected to the category the view is
defined for.
To remove a field from the view, highlight the field name in the
Fields In Report list box and select the Remove Field button.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields In
Report list box to remove it without selecting the Remove Field
button.
You can also combine fields in the view by selecting the Combine
Fields button and then selecting the desired fields.
Any changes you make to the design are temporary unless you
use Views-Save View or Views-Save View As to save the
changed view.
Select Font Dialog Box
Type a font name and font size in the Font Name and Font Size
text boxes, or select from the associated drop-down list boxes.
The valid font names and sizes in the list box reflect the fonts you
have installed in Windows.
 
You can also change the font style to Bold, Italic and/or Underline
by selecting the appropriate check boxes.
 
The Font Appearance box shows you what the selected font and
style look like.
 
Select OK once you've made your selections; you are returned to
the dialog box from which this window was invoked.
Letter Template Dialog Box
This dialog box appears when you select either the Add Text
button or the Edit button (with a text template highlighted) on the
Letter Template tab.
 
Select the topic below that matches the button you pressed:
 
Adding a Text Template
Editing a Text Template
Adding a Formatted Letter Template
See Also
To add a new formatted letter template, select the Add
Formatted button on the Letter Template tab. This displays the
Add Formatted Template dialog box.
 
Type a brief description for the new template in the Template
Name text box.
 
Use the For Category drop-down list box to select the category
that you want the template to be used with.
 
Finally, select the Create Template button to start up your word
processor with the new (empty) template file.
 
If you are using Word 2000 or later version, you are prompted for
the type of letter template to be created. Select the proper format.
This determines how the template will look.
 
You can enter Field Codes into the template by using the
Commence toolbar. Again, this assumes that you have installed
the required letter macros for your word processor.
 
You can format the template file using any features that are
available in your word processor: multiple fonts, page numbering,
date fields, bookmarks, embedded graphics, etc. When you are
satisfied with the template, save it, being sure to keep the original
filename so that Commence can locate the template when it
needs it to send letters.
Editing a Formatted Letter Template
To edit a formatted letter template, select the Edit button on the
Letter Template tab with a formatted template highlighted. This
displays the Edit Formatted Template dialog box.
File Name shows you the filename of the letter template file. This
file is stored in the tmplts subdirectory of the current database.
Do not change the name of this file when editing the letter
template.
To change the description of the template, use the Template
Name text box.
If you want to use the template with a different category, select
the new category with the For Category drop-down list box.
Note: If you change the category, the old Field Codes may not
properly map into the new category specified (unless the field
names were identical in both categories). You will need to select
the View button to edit the template and run the appropriate
macro for your Word Processor to insert the field codes for the
new category. Then save the template. See Using Field Codes in
Templates for instructions on how to insert field codes in
templates.
If you select Save, then any changes you have made to the
category or template name will be saved. If you select Cancel,
the template will be left unchanged.
If you want to change the contents of the template file, select the
View button. If you have changed the category or name, these
changes will automatically be saved. Commence then launches
your word processor and opens the template file. Use the word
processor to make any changes to the template file (new text,
Field Codes, formatting, etc.).
Add/Edit Trigger Dialog Box
Selecting the T button under If this Trigger occurs in the New
Agent or Edit Agent dialog box brings up the Add Trigger dialog
box. If you are editing an existing trigger, then the title bar of the
dialog box says Edit Trigger and the details of the existing trigger
appear in the box. The controls and operation of the two boxes
are identical.
 
The same dialog box is used for all triggers, but its contents vary
depending on what you highlight in the Trigger Type list on the
left hand side of the box. As you select a different trigger type, the
right hand side of the box changes to present the options
appropriate for the trigger type you have highlighted. Also, when
you highlight a different Trigger Type a brief description of the
trigger you have selected is shown under the list box.
 
If you select the Clear button in the Add Trigger or Edit Trigger
dialog box, the options for the current trigger are cleared. The OK
button returns you to the previous dialog box (New Agent or Edit
Agent) and saves the trigger values you have defined. The
Cancel command restores the previous trigger options (if any).
 
These are the triggers that you can use in Commence agents:
 
Commence Event
Fires when Commence starts or exits
Incoming Communication
Fires when a telephone call or E-Mail message is received
Item Alarm
Fires before a data item becomes current Keyboard Hotkey
Fires when you select a specific keyboard hotkey combination
Menu Pick
Fires when you select the associated menu pick from the Tools
menu
Receive DDE
Receive parameterized data from other Windows applications
and pass this data to the agent's actions Save Item
Fires when a data item is saved (added and/or edited)
Timer
Fires at predefined times
Tool Bar Pick
Fires when you select the associated button on the tool bar
Add/Edit Condition Dialog Box
To add, edit or delete a condition for an agent, select one of the
two condition buttons (1 or 2) on the New Agent or Edit Agent
dialog boxes.
 
Every agent can have up to two conditions in addition to its
trigger. Conditions place further qualifications on the initiation of
an agent, or identify other items for the agent's actions to operate
on. The Time Interval condition is only useful in the former mode:
it simply provides an additional test to determine if the agent
should be invoked. Item Count and Field Summary conditions
can be used both to further define the agent initiation and to
select condition items.
 
If you are adding a new condition, the Add Condition dialog box
appears. If you are editing an existing trigger, then the Edit
Condition box will appear. The controls and operation of the two
boxes are identical. The same dialog box is used for all
conditions, but its contents vary depending on what you highlight
in the Condition Type list on the left hand side of the box. This
dialog box lets you set the options for any condition type.
 
As you select different conditions, a brief description of the
condition you have selected is shown under the list box.
 
If you select Clear in the Add Condition or Edit Condition box,
the values for the current condition are cleared. The OK button
saves the values, and the Cancel button restores the previous
values (in an edit situation).
 
The three conditions available for use in Commence's Agents are
the following:
 
Field Summary Condition
True based on a calculated value summarized across items
Item Count
True based on the number of item meeting its criteria Time
Interval
True for specified date/time intervals
Clear
See Also
You have cleared the trigger, condition, or action that you were
working on.
 
If you are editing an agent, select the same Trigger, Condition,
or Action Type again to see the original definition.
 
Otherwise, select a new Type from the list box, or select one of
the OK or Cancel buttons.
Add Item Action
The Add Item action creates a new item, optionally using values
in the new item from a trigger or condition item.
Select the category that the new item will be added to using the
Category drop-down list box under Add Items To.
When you select the Field Values button, you are presented with
a Field Values dialog box that lets you specify the field values for
the new data item using text that you supply, default values for
the category (if you leave the field blank), or Field Codes from the
trigger or condition item.
Note that if the values for an Add Item action are taken from the
trigger item, then the action creates a single data item. However,
if an Add Item action uses condition items, it produces a new
item for every item in the set of condition items passed to it.
If you select the Display Item(s) check box, then the item(s) that
you add are displayed when the agent operates. You can then
manually add or edit the fields of the new item before it is saved.
If you don't select Display Item(s), Commence does all the work
for you automatically. If you are displaying items, you can also
specify the form that is used for the item detail using the Form
drop-down list box. If condition data is being used (so that
multiple items can be generated), a view of the new items is
displayed. If you don't select the Display Item(s) check box, then
Form is grayed out.
If you select the Connect to Selected Item(s) check box, then
the new item is connected to the trigger or condition item using
any available connection definition. This check box is available
even in the case when the category of the incoming trigger item is
unspecified. (For example, when using a trigger item from a
Menu Pick trigger that is not associated with a specific category.)
Application Launch Action
The Application Launch action can start up another Windows
application and pass it command line data.
 
In the Run area, use the Program: text box to enter the
command line text (the command line specifies the application
executable). If the application executable is in your path, you can
just enter the filename (e.g., write.exe), otherwise enter the full
path (e.g., c:\program files\microsoft office\office11\winword.exe).
 
If there are any command line arguments that are to be passed to
the executable, enter them in the Argument: text box. The
command line text can contain Field Codes from the selected
trigger or condition item.
 
If you want to browse your PC file system to locate the application
path and insert it into the text box, use the Select button. Use the
Insert Field button to insert valid Field Codes from the trigger or
condition item(s).
 
By selecting the corresponding option in the Mode drop-down list,
the application can be started in Normal mode (a standard
window with the focus), Maximized (a full screen window with the
focus), or Minimized (an icon without the focus, useful for
background processing).
Backup Action
The Backup action creates a backup of your open database.
 
When this action is performed, it does a full backup of the
database as if the Backup button had been selected from the
File-Open/Manage Database dialog box.
 
When you highlight the Backup action type, the Backup to group
box appears on the right side of the dialog box. Type in the name
of the file to hold your backup data.
 
Note: If you would like to store the backup file on a diskette,
specify a:\ in front of the filename in the group box.
Create E-Mail Action The Create E-Mail action
creates and sends an electronic mail message.
Before defining the actual message, you must
choose whether the category containing the
recipient’s name will come from the trigger or
condition data. This selection is made using the "To
Recipients Specified Using:" radio group.
If your Create E-Mail action is defined with "To Recipients
Specified Using: Trigger", one e-mail message will be created
when the agent fires. If your Create E-Mail action is defined with
"To Recipients Specified Using: Condition 1 or 2", one e-mail
message will be sent for each item matching the condition.
Once this selection has been made, it is time to proceed to the
Define E-Mail dialog box. This dialog box appears when the
Define Message button is selected.
Delete Item Action The Delete Item action deletes
one item when using values from the trigger. This is
equivalent to the Edit-Delete Item command.
 
When using values from a condition item, the Delete Item action
deletes ALL the items which meet the condition. This is
equivalent to the Edit-Delete All Items command.
Use this action carefully. You will not be presented with a
confirmation message. The items will be deleted automatically.
Edit Item Action
The Edit Item action edits data items, either the single trigger
item or multiple items from one of the conditions. When you
select the Field Values button, Commence displays the Field
Values dialog box that lets you specify the field values for the
edited data item using text that you supply and/or Field Codes
from the unedited values.
 
If you select the Display Item(s) check box, then the item(s) that
you edit are displayed when the agent operates. If you are
displaying items, you can also specify the form to use for the item
detail by using the Form drop-down list box. If you do not select
the Display Item(s) check box, then the Form drop-down list box
will be grayed out.
 
If the values for an Item Edit/Display action are taken from the
trigger item, then the action edits a single data item. However, if
an Item Edit/Display action uses condition items, it edits all the
items in the condition set. When multiple items are edited, a
report view of the edited items is displayed if you select the
Display Item(s) check box.
 
Note that the Item Edit/Display action requires selection of either
a trigger or a condition from a specific category.
Export Action
The Export action exports data from your open database to a
pre-selected import/export file using a pre-selected template.
Note: Before defining this agent, make sure you already have an
appropriate export template defined. If you do not, use the
Customize-Database-Import/Export command to do so.
 
When you highlight the Export action type in the Add or Edit
Action dialog box, the Export Items From group boxes appear
on the right side of the dialog box. Use these group boxes to
choose the items to export, to select an import/export template
and to enter the name of an export file.
 
The DOS Text checkbox allows you to translate between the
Windows standard character set and the DOS character set. If
you are sharing information between Commence and other
Windows applications, leave this box unchecked. If you are
sharing information between Commence and other applications
that run in DOS but are not designed specifically for Windows,
you should check this box.
 
The Archive after Export check box allows you to delete all
items that have been exported from your database.
 
Caution: Use this option only to archive and delete items you
no longer need in your database.
Import Action
The Import action imports data from a pre-selected import/export
file to your open database using a pre-selected template.
Note: Before defining this agent, make sure you already have an
appropriate import template defined. If you do not, use the
File-Import command to do so.
 
When you highlight the Import action type in the Add or Edit
Action dialog box, the Import Using group box appears on the
right side of the dialog box. Use this group box to select an
import/export template and to enter the name of an import file.
 
The DOS Text checkbox allows you to translate between the
Windows standard character set and the DOS character set. If
you are sharing information between Commence and other
Windows applications, leave this box unchecked. If you are
sharing information between Commence and other applications
that run in DOS but are not designed specifically for Windows,
you should check this box.
Manage Desktop Action
The Manage Desktop action allows you to manipulate the views
on the active desktop. It also allows you to open another desktop.
 
Choose one of the following radio buttons:
 
Cascade Overlaps all normal and maximized views on the
desktop. The active view will be placed on top, and
all other views will be stacked behind it. Minimized
views are left minimized.
Resize All Resizes all views (except minimized views) so that
they fit on the active desktop while maintaining the
relative porportions and positions of each individual
view.
Tile Horizontally Re-positions all normal and maximized views
on the desktop. The active view will be placed on
top, and all other views will be arranged under the
active view. Minimized views are left minimized.
Tile Vertically Re-positions all normal and maximized views on
the desktop. The active view will be positioned left-
most on the desktop, and all other views will be
arranged side-by-side to the right of the active view.
Minimized views are left minimized.
Close All Closes all views, including minimized views.
Open Desktop Switches to the specified desktop.
 
If you select the Open Desktop option, you must also select the
desktop you wish to open from the drop-down list box.
Message Box Action
The Message Box action displays a Commence message box
that displays a message and up to four action buttons that allow
the user to perform additional actions when the box is displayed.
You control the text of the message and the buttons you want to
appear in the box (if any).
 
Enter the text of the message in the Display Message text box.
The text of the message can contain Field Codes from the
selected trigger or condition data. If you have selected trigger or
condition item(s) from a specific category, the Insert Field button
will be active. You can then select Insert Field to add a Field
Code to the Display Message text box. When the box is
displayed, if you have checked Audible Alarm. a tone sounds to
further alert you.
 
Three buttons may appear in any message box displayed by
agents: OK, Snooze and Snooze All. If you select the OK button
in the message box the message box disappears.
 
Selecting the Snooze or Snooze All button displays a Set
Snooze Time dialog box that asks for the number of minutes after
which you want the message box to reappear. Snooze affects
only the currently displayed message box, while Snooze All
affects the current message box and all currently pending
message boxes. If you use the Snooze button and there are
pending messages, the next pending message is displayed after
you select the snooze time.
Note: The Message Box snooze alarm works only within a
Commence session. That is, if you set a snooze time for a
message box and then exit Commence, the snooze time is lost
and the message box will not reappear when you reopen
Commence.
 
The message box can optionally display up to four Action
Buttons. Each of the Action Buttons can in turn invoke an
additional sub-action (the full set of actions are available as
possible sub-actions, except for Message Box). These actions
are specified just like other agent actions, but only the action
corresponding to the button you select when the agent executes
is performed (i.e., you select one button, the corresponding action
is performed, and then the message box exits). If you select the
OK button in the message box, no action is performed and the
message box disappears. If you select one of the action buttons,
the corresponding sub-action will be performed.
 
If the Message Action is not the last action for the agent, a
Cancel button is also displayed in the message box under the OK
button. Selecting Cancel tells Commence to perform none of the
sub-actions and cancel the remaining actions not yet performed
by the agent.
 
When you select the Action Buttons button in the Edit Action or
New Action dialog boxes, Commence displays the Message Box
Actions dialog box.
New View Action
A New View action creates and displays a new view. The view
can show a new view of the trigger item, the condition items, or
any category. Select the radio button under View Items In to
make your choice.
 
If you select Category, a drop-down list box appears to the right
that lets you choose the category you want to view. If you select
Category, you can also use the Select Filter button to bring up
Filters tab and define a filter for that category.
 
Select the view type for the new view using the View As drop-
down list box. If you select report, you can choose to view the
item names only, or all fields by choosing the corresponding
button in the Report Style radio group.
 
The new view action is a convenient way to display condition
items in an agent. In addition to being useful in a production
agent, it is helpful to check out the operation of new agents.
Open View Action
An Open View action opens an existing saved view. The view to
be opened can be selected using the same category as the
trigger item, or the condition items. Select the radio button under
Using Values From to make your choice.
 
If you prefer, you may select a specific category to be used every
time, regardless of the trigger or conditions. If you select
Category, a drop-down list box appears to the right that lets you
choose the category you want to view.
 
Use the View Name drop-down list box under Open View to
select the view.
 
Open the view if another copy is already open.
Outlook Sync
This action allows you to automate the synchronization of data
with Microsoft Outlook. The Outlook Sync action lets you select
Contacts, Calendar, or Tasks for synchronization. If for example
Contacts is the only selected application, then only the Contact
information will synchronize with Outlook. If the agent is designed
to synchronize just one application, this setting is enforced even if
other Outlook Application preferences are mapped.
Play Multimedia Action
This action allows you to play multimedia files including sound
and video files. If you have the proper hardware and Windows
multimedia drivers installed, you can play a special sound or
video clip. For example, you can play a special sound to warn you
about pending appointments. To define a Play Multimedia action,
file in the File text box with the path of the multimedia file to be
played. You can use the Select button to search your PC for the
path to a multimedia file. The type of multimedia file is identified
by the file's extension. Common multimedia file types include:
.WAV (sound files), .AVI (video files), .MID (MIDI files). See the
Drivers section in your Windows Control Panel to determine
which multimedia capabilities your system has installed.
Print Letter Action
A Print Letter action will generate a new letter based on one of
Commence's text letter templates (formatted letter templates
cannot be used with this action). It is equivalent to using the
commands that create and print letters.
The action requires the use of either a trigger item or condition
items. If you use a trigger item, a single letter is printed for the
trigger item (similar to using Send Letter and selecting the
Merge/No Preview option). If you use condition items, a letter is
printed for each of the condition items (similar to Send Letter).
Select the template to be used for the letter with the Templates
drop-down list box. The text templates available will be those for
the category of the trigger or condition item(s) that you have
selected. Thus you must select trigger or condition item(s) from a
specific category to use this action.
You can select the Log Item check box if you wish to have a
document log item created for the letter. If you select Log, use the
Item Name text box to enter a name for the Log Item. You can
insert a Field Code into the Log item name using Insert Field.
(Keep in mind that Item names are limited to 50 characters: the
name is truncated if it exceeds this limit.)
See Letter File Storage for an explanation of where on your hard
disk letters are stored.
If you select the Send to Printer radio button, then the letter will
be printed. You can enter the number of copies that you want
printed in the Copies text box. If you select the Fonts button,
then you will see the Select Font dialog box that will let you
specify the font to be used when the letter is printed.
If you select the Send to File radio button, then the letter is
saved in a file instead of being printed. Enter the full path and
name of the file in the text box below the button. You can use
Field Codes in the text box, but be aware that the action will fail if
the generated filename is invalid when the agent operates. If you
select both Send to File and Log Item then the document log
item will point to the file that you have specified. This option is
useful if you want to create text files that will be passed on to
other applications (e.g., electronic mail packages).
The Send to File radio button can only be selected if you are
using a trigger item (single letters) since condition items would
generate multiple letters that could not be saved in a single file.
Thus, if you select condition items the Send to File radio button
is grayed out.
Process E-Mail Action
When used with the trigger, Incoming Communication, this agent
action can either delete the incoming E-Mail, or mark the E-Mail
as Read. These actions can be performed whether the E-Mail
application is running in the background or not.
Send DDE Action
See Also
A Send DDE action sends a DDE message to another Windows
application. Press the Define Message button.
PROGRAM. . . GROUP BOX
If you want Commence to start up the other application if it is not
already active, turn on the Run If Necessary check box and
enter the path of the receiving application in the File Name text
box. You can browse your PC's file system to find the application
and insert its path in the File Name text box by using the Select
button.
 
CONVERSATION. . . GROUP BOX
 
Enter the DDE name of the other application in the Application
Name text box. For Commence, the Application name is
Commence. Enter the DDE Topic in the Topic Name text box.
This information can be found in the manual for the other
application.
 
DDE MESSAGE. . . GROUP BOX
You can send a DDE Execute message or a DDE Poke message
with data to a Windows application.
 
To send a DDE Execute message, turn on the Execute radio
button in the DDE Message group box and enter the text of the
DDE message in the Message Text text box.
 
To send a DDE Poke message, turn on the Poke radio button in
the DDE Message group box. The message must consist of two
parts: the data and an item name . Enter the item name (or
similar data identifier, such as row-column number for
spreadsheets) into the Item Name text box. Then specify the text
of the Poke message in the Message Text box.
 
The DDE message can contain Field Codes from the selected
trigger or condition item(s). Use the Insert Field command to
include field codes from the trigger or condition data in the data
identifier and/or the data. See Using Trigger and Condition Data
Notes: If you select to send DDE Poke message, make sure that
the application expects this command instead of a DDE Execute
message. DDE Request messages are not supported in
Commence agent actions.
Set Agent Status
A Set Agent Status action is used to activate and deactivate
other Commence agents. Select an agent name from the Agent
list box and use the Active and Inactive radio buttons to select
the action.
 
The Set Agent Status action does not use values from trigger or
condition item(s).
Status Bar Message Action
A Status Bar Message action displays a message on
Commence's status bar. Enter the text of the message in the text
box under Display Status Bar Message. The message text can
contain Field Codes from the selected trigger or condition item(s).
 
Use the Insert Field button to select from a list of available Field
Codes for the selected trigger or condition category. If you select
the Audible Alarm check box, an alarm will sound as the
message is displayed. Messages on the status bar will clear after
six seconds, or sooner if another message is written to the status
bar.
 
All Status Bar Messages are added to the log of status bar
message that can be viewed using the Help-Message Log
command.
 
 
 
 
 
Sync Link In Action
A Sync Link In action
updates a database in a Sync Link
transport group with data from a pre-selected update file.
Note: Before defining this agent, make sure you already have
an appropriate sync link group
defined. If you do not, use the Tools-Sync Link Out command to
do so.
 
When you highlight the Sync Link In
action type in the Add or Edit Action
dialog box, the Sync Link In Using
group box
appears on the right side of the dialog box. Use this group box to
enter the name of the update file.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sync Link Out Action
A Sync Link Out action
generates updates to a pre-selected file that can be used to
update a specific database in a Sync Link
transport group.
Note: Before defining this agent, make sure you already have
an appropriate sync link group
defined. If you do not, use the Tools-Sync Link Out command to
do so.
 
When you highlight the Sync Link Out
action type in the Add or Edit Action
dialog box, the Sync Link Out Using
group box
appears on the right side of the dialog box. Use this group box to
select a remote database
name, and to enter the name of the update file.
 
 
 
 
Use Telephone Action
The Use Telephone action can be used to answer an incoming
phone call, hang up the phone, or dial the phone. This action can
be used with the Incoming Communication trigger.
Using Trigger and Condition Data
All actions (except Icon Modification, Open View, and Set
Agent Status) allow you to use the trigger item or one of the two
condition item sets (if you have selected conditions for the agent)
as part of the action specification.
 
One of the actions (Edit Item) requires this selection, since the
item(s) to be edited must be either the trigger item or one of the
two sets of condition items. You make the selection of trigger or
condition item(s) by picking the appropriate radio button in the
Using Values From section. If you have not selected conditions
for the agent, the condition radio buttons will be grayed out. Also,
if you select a trigger or condition that is not capable of passing
items, then the corresponding button will also be grayed out. By
default, the Trigger radio button is selected for new actions.
 
Whichever button you select, the corresponding category name
will be shown after Selected Category. The category shown is
determined by the category of the trigger item or the condition
items. If no specific category is implied by your choice, then you
will see Selected Category: (All Categories).
 
Note that for any particular trigger or condition, the item(s)
passed to an action will always come from one category.
Furthermore, except for the case of a trigger item from (All
Categories), when you define an agent, you will know exactly
what fields are available from the trigger or condition item, since
the fields are determined by the category of the item. You can use
data from these fields in the action by inserting Field Codes in the
places where you want the data to appear. Whenever you have
selected a specific category, an Insert Field button appears to let
you select Field Codes from the category. When the agent
operates, the Field Codes are replaced with the corresponding
values from the trigger or condition item. See Using Field Codes
In Actions.
 
You can use trigger data when filtering a category in an Item
Count condition. If you create an agent that has trigger data, then
a condition in that same agent can contain a filter using field
codes representing values from the trigger item. This lets you
pass data from the trigger to the condition. An example is an
agent that passes the Close Date to the connected Support Call
when a Support Followup item is closed. . For this example, the
condition filter must isolate the Item Name of the connected
Support Call in order to accurately determine which Support Call
item must be modified. The following filter on the Support Call
category accomplishes this task.:
has - Support Followup - Name - Contains - (-
TrigItemName-)
Filtering By Field Value
See Also
The available filter options are different for each field type.
 
For a calculation, number, or sequence number field type, the
comparison operators are Equal To, Greater Than, Is Between,
Less Than, and Not Equal To. Choose the comparison you want
and type a numeric comparison value into the Field Value text
box. When filtering for a range of numbers (Is Between), type the
low number into the Minimum Value text box and type the high
number into the Maximum Value text box.
 
A check box field type can only be Checked or Not Checked.
 
For a date field type, the comparison operators are After, Before,
Is Between, Is Blank, and On. Choose the comparison you want
and type a comparison value (in the appropriate date format
selected via the Windows Control Panel) into the Field Value text
box. When filtering for a range of dates (Is Between), type the
start date into the Minimum Value text box and type the end date
into the Maximum Value text box. You can specify a natural
language date instead of a literal date.
 
For an e-mail address, internet address, or text field type, you
can select from the following comparison operations:
 
Contains You want to see items whose selected field contains
the value you typed into the edit box, but other
text can appear in the field.
Does Not Contain You want to see items whose select field
does not contain the value you typed into the
edit box.
Equal To You only want to see items whose selected field
exactly matches the value you typed into the
text box. No other text should appear in the
item's field value.
Is Between You only want to see items whose selected field
contains values ranging between the Minimum
and Maximum Value.
Is Blank You only want to see items whose selected field
contains no text.
 
The name uses all the same comparison operators as text fields
and also allows the following:
 
Has Duplicates You want to see items whose name fields
contain the same value.
 
After selecting a comparison operator for the name, e-mail
address, internet address, or text field types, you can then enter a
single field value, or press the Options button to enter 4 or more
field values (up to 10). See the topic titled Advanced Filter
Options. The Match Case checkbox allows you to perform either
a case-sensitive or case-insensitive operation as needed.
 
Note: Telephone fields can be filtered using all the same
comparison operations as text fields except Is Between.
Advanced filter options are not available for telephone fields.
 
You can also use wildcards in a comparison value for a name,
telephone, e-mail address, internet address, or text field type.
 
For a selection type field, you select one of the Equals or Does
Not Equal comparison operators, and then select a value from
the list box displayed.
 
For a time field, the comparison operators are After, At, Before,
Is Between, and Is Blank. Choose the comparison you want and
type a comparison value into the Field Value text box. When
filtering for a range of times (Is Between), type the start time into
the Minimum Value text box and type the end time into the
Maximum Value text box. The time value entered must be in the
appropriate time format set via the Windows Control Panel. You
can specify a natural language time value instead of a literal time.
 
Select OK to confirm your choice or Cancel to return to previous
screen without selecting a field value.
Wildcards
Simple and multiple filters allow you to use wildcards that match
one, or one or more, instances of a character. Wildcards can be
used only when filtering by a name, text, or telephone field.
 
"?" is a special character that matches a single instance of any
ASCII character in a name or text field. For example, "070??"
would match any zip code beginning with 070 followed by two
characters. To filter for blank fields, you can use the Contains
qualifier as the comparison operator and search for "?".
 
"*" is a special character that matches zero or more instances of
any ASCII character. For example, searching for "Smith,*" in the
Person's name field would select all people with the last name of
Smith.
 
Note: In telephone field-based filters using the Does Not Contain
or Contains qualifier, only "*" can be used as a wildcard as
explained above. Neither a "?" nor a "*" can be used as a
wildcard in a filter on a telephone field using the Equal To
qualifier.
Select Color Field Dialog Box
When you select the Add button on the Color Code tab, the
Select Color Field dialog box is displayed.
 
You should choose a field on which to base your color code
template. When the field value changes, a different color will be
used for that item. Highlight the name of the field and press the
Select button to choose a field for the template. Only selection
fields, check box fields, and connection definitions can be used in
color templates, so those are the only fields listed to choose from.
 
Shortcut: Mouse users can double-click the left mouse button
while pointing at a field name to choose it without using the
Select button.
 
Once you choose a field, the Color Code Template dialog box is
displayed.
Color Code Template Dialog Box
COLOR CODE NAME TEXT BOX
 
If you are adding a new color code template, fill in a short
description of the template here. You must type in a name before
you can save the template. Template names are limited to 24
characters.
 
If you are editing a color code template, you may edit the name if
you wish.
UP TO EIGHT FIELD/COLOR BOX SLOTS
Beneath the Color Code Name text box, up to eight colored
boxes (depending on the field type) are displayed.
 
When you are adding a template, a number of blank slots are
displayed, each with a color box and a drop-down list box. You
must select field values and color for each slot.
 
When you are editing a template, each slot displays a field value
and the color assigned to that value. You can change the color
assigned to a slot at any time.
 
To change a color, click on the colored box. Selecting one of the
color boxes opens a drop-down color list box of 16 colors to
choose from. Select a new color from the list.
 
If the field on which the template is based is a selection field,
each slot corresponds to a radio button in the group (radio groups
contain at most 8 radio buttons) or a selection in the combo box
drop down list..
 
If the field on which the template is based is a check box field,
two slots are displayed (check box fields have two possible
values: checked or unchecked).
 
If the field on which the template is based is a connection
definition, eight slots are displayed, each with a drop-down list
box initially set to Unused. If you select the arrow at the right of
one of the list boxes, you'll see a list of all the connected items'
names. You can select item names for the first six slots. If there
are less than six connected items in the drop-down box, you
should leave extra slots set to Unused. The last two slots are
reserved for the special entries None and Default Color. None is
used when the connected item has not been associated with a
color. The Default Color is used when the connection on which
the template is based is blank (unconnected) or if multiple items
are connected.
 
SAVE AND CANCEL BUTTONS
Once you are satisfied with the template, select the Save button
to save the template; select the Cancel button to cancel the add
or edit operation.
Add Connection Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Add button on
the Customize-Database-Connection dialog box.
 
The active category's name is highlighted in the From text box
automatically. Highlight a category name for the other side of the
link in the To box and select OK.
 
The Names for New Connection dialog box is displayed in which
you specify one name for a simple connection or two names for a
paired connection. The connection name(s) are used to label
connection fields on item detail forms.
Edit Connection Names Dialog Box
Names for New Connection Dialog Box
These identical dialog boxes are displayed when adding or
editing connection definitions from the Customize-Database-
Connection dialog box.
 
For a paired connection, two text boxes are displayed, labeled
with the two categories participating in the connection definition.
If you are editing a connection definition , the boxes contain the
existing connection definition names.
 
For a simple connection, one text box are displayed, labeled with
the category participating in the connection definition. If you are
editing a connection definition , the box contains the existing
connection definition name.
 
For a new connection definition, type a name into the text
box(es). The name(s) you pick should reflect the purpose of the
connection definition .
 
Select the Save button to save the names you choose. Select
Cancel to cancel the add or edit operation.
 
If you're editing a connection definition name, Commence
changes the connection definition name(s) in all items in the two
categories once you select Save. This may take some time,
depending on the number of existing category items. When it is
finished, you are returned to the Connection dialog box, which
now reflects the new connection name(s).
Connection Fields Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Advanced
button on the Customize-Database-Connection dialog box, then
click Field Option. You can choose the fields to appear in the
connection pop-up window and in the connection field on the
detail form.
 
The Fields in Report and Fields Not In Report list boxes show
the list of fields (including connection definitions) that appear in
the connection and those that don't appear in the connection,
respectively.
 
The Fields in Report list box displays field names in the order in
which the fields appear in the view.
 
ADDING COLUMNS
To append a field to the list of fields in the view (making the new
field the last field listed in the view), highlight the field name in
the Fields Not In Report list box and select the Append Field
button.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields Not In
Report list box to append it to the Fields In Report list without
selecting the Append Field button.
 
To insert a field into the list of fields in the view, highlight a field
name in the Fields Not In Report list box and highlight the
position where you want the field inserted in the Fields In
Report list box. Then, select the Insert Field button.
 
ADDING RELATED COLUMNS
If the field you select is a connection definition, you can choose
to display any of the fields from the connected item. Commence
displays a list box containing the list of fields in the connected
category. Select the fields, one field at a time, from the list. Note
that connection definitions in the connected category are not
displayed in the list box.
 
REMOVING COLUMNS
To remove a field from the connection, highlight the field name in
the Fields In Report list box and select the Remove Field
button.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields In
Report list box to remove it without selecting the Remove Field
button.
 
COLUMN HEADINGS
If needed, you can change the label that appears at the top of
the column for each field in the connection. Highlight the field
name in the Fields In Report list box and select the Field
Options button. Then enter the new field label in the label box.
Design Form Dialog Box
If you select the Add, Edit, or Copy buttons from the Detail Form
dialog box, the dialog box named above is displayed.
 
From the Display tab, you can choose a name for a detail form
and select the fields to appear on the form. You can also invoke
dialog boxes that let you drag fields to new positions in the form,
set the field attributes like color and font.
 
The Advanced tab lets you set printing and auto-selection options
for the form.
 
From the Scripting tab, you can create Visual Basic scripts for
each form. This enables such operations as setting default
values, filling in fields, and navigating within the form, as well as
performing validation checks before an item is saved.
 
SAVE
Select the Save button to save the detail form you are working
on.
 
CANCEL
Select Cancel to cancel the new, edited, or copied detail form
and return to the Detail Form dialog box.
Set Default Detail Forms Dialog Box
Use the Set Defaults button on the Detail Form dialog box to
define which detail form to always use for adding an item (Default
for Add Item) and which detail form to use when you edit or view
an item detail (Default for Item Detail).
 
If you have more than one form defined for a category and do not
select defaults, Commence will ask you to choose a detail form
when you display or add an item detail.
 
If you have only one form for a category, Commence will
automatically display that form for adding and displaying items,
even if you have not set defaults.
 
Choose default forms for adding and editing items by selecting a
form name from the drop-down list boxes on the Set Defaults
dialog box. The same form name can be used for both defaults.
 
The Auto Select Detail Form When option on the Design Form
dialog box overrides the default form for viewing or editing an
item detail set using this dialog box.
Import Rules Dialog Box
When you select the Import Rules button from the Template
Definition dialog box, Commence displays the Import Rules
dialog box.
 
The New Items radio group tells Commence how to insert items
with new names into your category. Select the Add radio button
to automatically add each item with a new name into the
category. Select the Ask before adding radio button to have
Commence prompt you for confirmation before adding each new
item.
 
The Existing Items radio group tells Commence how to handle
incoming items that have the same name as one or more existing
items in your category. How you want to handle these items will
depend in part on whether your category allows duplicates. The
radio button choices are described below.
 
Delete all existing items before input
Deletes all items in the target category before adding the new
data from the import file.
 
Replace duplicates, all fields
Deletes each item in the target category whose name matches
that of an incoming data item and replaces it with the data item
from the import file.
 
Replace duplicates, imported fields only
For duplicate items, replaces only the field values being
imported. Other field values in the item remain unchanged.
 
Ask on duplicates, then replace all fields
For each item in the target category whose name matches that of
an incoming data item, display a message box showing the item
name and you if it should replace the existing data item. If you
select OK, the existing data item is deleted and the incoming
data item is added.
 
Ask on duplicates, then replace imported fields only
For each item in the target category whose name matches that of
an incoming data item, display a message box showing the item
name and you if it should replace the data fields for this item. If
you select OK, the existing data fields in the item is deleted and
the incoming data item is added.
 
Add duplicates as new item
If the category allows duplicates, items with the same names as
existing items will simply be added to the category.
 
If an incoming item has a blank name field, Commence
automatically assigns the value (none) as the item name. To use
this feature, make sure that your category allows duplicates.
Turn on the Add duplicates as new items radio button, so that
all of the items so named are imported into the category.
 
Skip duplicates
Ignore an incoming item that has the same name as an existing
item.
 
When you have chosen the rules you want, select OK to return to
the Template Mapping dialog box.
Export Rules Dialog Box
When you select the Export Rules button from the Template
Definition dialog box, Commence displays the Export Rules
dialog box.
 
The New Items radio group tells Commence how to handle items
with new names that are not found in the external data source.
Select the Add radio button to automatically add each item with a
new name into the data source. Select the Ask before adding
radio button to have Commence prompt you for confirmation
before adding each new item.
 
The Existing Items radio group tells Commence how to handle
exported items that have the same name as one or more existing
items in your external data source. How you want to handle these
items will depend in part on whether the table allows duplicates.
The radio button choices are described below.
 
Delete all existing items before export
Deletes all items in the target data source before adding the new
data from Commence.
 
Replace duplicates, all fields
Deletes each item in the target data source whose name
matches that of an exported data item and replaces it with the
data item from Commence.
 
Replace duplicates, exported fields only
For duplicate items, replaces only the columns in data source
that have been mapped to field values being exported. Other
columns in the item remain unchanged.
 
Ask on duplicates, then replace all fields
For each item in the target data source whose name matches
that of an exported data item, display a message box showing
the item name and you if it should replace the existing data item.
If you select OK, the existing data item is deleted and the data
from Commence item is added.
 
Ask on duplicates, then replace exported fields only
For each item in the target data source whose name matches
that of an exported data item, display a message box showing
the item name and you if it should replace the data fields for this
item. If you select OK, the mapped fields in the item are cleared
and the field data from Commence is added.
 
Add duplicates as new items
If the table allows duplicates, items with the same names as
existing items will simply be added to the category.
 
Skip duplicates
Ignore an exported item that has the same name as an existing
item in the data source.
 
When you have chosen the rule you want, select OK to return to
the Template Mapping dialog box.
Server Communications Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you choose the Edit button
from the Workgroup Communications dialog box on the Server.
Fill in the necessary information for the selected method of
syncing. All methods of syncing may be configured to
accommodate each individual user’s needs.
Setting Server Communications
OK
Select OK to accept any changes you have made on this screen.
CANCEL
Select Cancel to return to the Workgroup Communications
dialog box without saving your changes.
 
 
 
 
Configuring E–Mail Parameters
Perform the following procedure to configure the Server to use E–
Mail
to exchange synchronizing information:
 
1. From the Workgroup
Communications Dialog Box, highlight E-Mail
and select the Edit
button.
Note: It is assumed that the e–mail application is already
installed
and operational.
2. Configure the E-Mail
parameters as follows:
. Mail
Program - select the appropriate mail program/protocol from
the
pull–down menu.
. Post
Office Path - only necessary if using cc:Mail
or similar VIM–based mail system.
. Profile
Name [only applies to Microsoft Outlook or MAPI compatible
programs]
- the name used to log into E-Mail program.
. Login
Name [only applies to CMC–compatible programs] - the
name used
by the Server to log into the E–Mail Account. This is the
account that
the Server will be using to send/receive sync packets to and
from clients.
. Password/Verify
Password - the password associated with the Profile
Name/Login Name defined above.
Note: Although the same mail account can be used for the
Server
and Clients, it is strongly recommended that the Server and
each Client
be assigned separate mail accounts.
3. When the Server’s e–mail login information is
correct, select OK.
4. Next, the e–mail address for the Server must be
specified. This is the address to which Clients mail their
update information during a synchronization.
5. Indicate how often (in minutes) the Server will
check the mail server for Client synchronization requests.
This number
should not be very large in order to assure the timely receipt
of updated information by the Server. A recommended value
is ten (10) minutes.
6. Select OK
when done. The Workgroup Communications
Dialog Box will be displayed.
 
 
 
Configuring Internet FTP Directory Parameters
Synchronizing via the Internet is much the same process as
synchronizing via a shared LAN directory, only instead of the
directory’s being located on a LAN, it is now located remotely and
is accessed via dial–up service (e.g. Internet Service Provider) or
a dedicated Internet connection. The transferring of sync files
between Client(s) and Server is then done using File Transfer
Protocol (FTP) procedures.
Perform the following procedure to configure the server with the
Internet FTP Directory information:
1. From the Workgroup Communications Dialog Box, highlight
Internet FTP Directory and select the Edit button.
2. Enter the Internet FTP Directory information. The format of
this address is ftp://DIRECTORY_NAME. If the Internet FTP
Directory is unknown, it should be available from the
Network Administrator responsible for the FTP site.
3. Enter the User Name under which the Server will log into the
Internet FTP Directory. It is recommended that the Admin
login be used.
4. Enter the Password for the Server’s Login ID.
5. Enter the Password again to Verify Password.
6. Indicate how often (in minutes) the Server will check the
Internet FTP Directory for Client synchronization requests. A
recommended value is fifteen (15) minutes.
7. After the Internet FTP Directory parameters have been
configured as desired, select OK. The Workgroup
Communications Dialog Box will be displayed.
After all desired Server Communications Parameters have been
successfully configured, select OK from the Workgroup
Communications Dialog Box. The Customize Workgroup -
Communications Dialog Box will again be displayed.
 
 
 
 
Configuring Shared LAN Directory Parameters
Perform the following procedure to configure the Server to use a
Shared
LAN Directory for exchanging synchronizing information:
 
1. From the Workgroup
Communications Dialog Box, highlight Shared LAN
Directory and select the Edit
button. See the following figure.
2. Set the path for the Shared LAN Directory. Enter this path
as it would be seen by the Commence Server. It is through
this directory that the Server will communicate
with the Clients by sending and receiving data files. The
directory selected should be accessible to all users, and
should be a new directory that
is not used by any other program or Commence. All users
require full access (read/write/create/delete/etc.) to this
directory.
Note: If unsure of the path to the Shared LAN Directory, or to
create a new directory, click on Select.
If the desired directory exists, navigate to the directory,
highlight
it, and click OK, then click OK
again. To create a new directory, click Create Directory,
provide the name of the new Shared LAN Directory, click OK,
then click OK
again.
3. Indicate how frequently (in seconds) the Server
should check the shared LAN directory for data updates sent
by Clients.
A very small number will guarantee that updates are
processed in a timely manner, although the Server may be
busy for extended periods of time.
This limits the Server’s ability to run other tasks. The default
value
for this is every 15 seconds. This value should be adjusted to
meet the specific needs for the Workgroup being established,
as well as the hardware specifications.
4. When the Shared LAN Directory parameters have
been configured as desired, select OK.
The Workgroup Communications
Dialog Box will be displayed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Configuring E–Mail Parameters
Perform the following procedure to configure a Commence Client
to use e–mail for synchronizing:
 
1. Select the Communicate with Server using: E–Mail radio
button.
2. Click OK.
The Client Communications Dialog Box is displayed.
3. Complete the User Address for the Client. This is the
address to which the Server sends synchronization
information that is intended for this Client.
4. Click OK
to return to the Customize Workgroup - Communications
Dialog Box.
 
 
 
Configuring Internet FTP Directory Parameters
Perform the following procedure to configure a Commence Client
to use an Internet FTP Directory for synchronizing:
1. Select the Communicate with Server using: Internet FTP
directory radio button.
2. Click OK. A message indicating that no further configuring of
parameters is necessary is displayed.
3. Click OK to return to the Customize Workgroup -
Communications Dialog Box.
 
 
 
 
Configuring Shared LAN Directory Parameters
The default method for synchronizing data within a Commence
Workgroup is using a Shared LAN Directory.
Perform the following procedure to configure a Commence Client
to use a Shared LAN Directory for synchronizing:
 
1. Select the Communicate with Server using: Shared LAN
directory radio button.
2. Click OK.
A message indicating that no further configuring is necessary
is displayed.
3. Click OK
to return to the Customize Workgroup - Communications
Dialog Box.
 
 
 
Category Tab
Categories store your data. Sometimes you may want to add a
new category or change one to meet your needs. To do this,
select the Customize-Database-Category command. You will see
a Category Names list box. Select a category from the list, then
press the appropriate button, depending on what customization
you need to do. Use the Edit button to customize your existing
category definitions (i.e., number and types of fields, field labels,
default field values, and other attributes that vary between field
types). You can add your own categories by adding entirely new
definitions (Add button) or copying an existing definition and
editing it (Copy button). You can also delete any category (Delete
button). For more information about deleting categories, see
Deleting Categories .
 
When you press the Time Conflict button, Commence displays
the Time Conflict Layout dialog box. Enabling time conflict
checking for a category means that Commence will check each
item added to the category for a time conflict with items already in
the category. If a conflict is detected, Commence asks you if you
want to add the conflicting item anyway.
 
You can change a category definition at any time, even if the
category has data in it. This means you can try out category
definitions and fine tune them as you work, without having to re-
enter any of your data. Use the Tutorial data to experiment with
new category definitions (see Help-Tutorial).
 
The Add, Edit, and Copy dialog boxes are identical except for the
following:
Pressing the Add button opens a dialog box titled Add New
Category; it is blank except for a Name field (of type name),
which is required in every category. ). You can edit the field
to change its label. Regardless of how you label it, the value
contained in this field is used by the various view types as a
key for accessing items.
Pressing the Edit button opens a dialog box titled Category
Definition; it is filled in with the definition of the selected
category. You can change the name and the definition of any
of the fields, but not a field's type.
Pressing the Copy button opens a dialog box is titled Copy
Category; it is filled in with the definition of the selected
category, except that the Category Name is blank.
 
Note: Copy Category does not copy items or the connections to
the new category, just the category definition (i.e., number and
types of fields, etc.).
 
Once you have chosen to add, edit, or copy the selected
category, the Fields list box will be displayed.
FIELDS LIST BOX
This list box displays the labels of the currently defined fields for
the category. Highlight a field label in the list box and select one
of the Add, Edit, or Delete buttons (described below) to add,
edit, or delete the definition of the highlighted field.
 
Shortcut: Double-click the left mouse button while pointing at a
field in the Fields box to edit a field's definition without selecting
the Edit button.
ADD BUTTON
Select this button to add a field label and definition to the
category. The Add Field dialog box is displayed.
 
Note: After you Add a new field, you can select the Edit button
to change that field's type (regardless of whether you are
adding, editing, or copying a category). After you select the Save
button to save the category definition, however, the field type is
made permanent and you cannot change it in subsequent editing
sessions.
EDIT BUTTON
Select this button to edit a field label of an existing field, or the
field label and/or type of a newly added field. The Edit Field
dialog box is displayed.
 
You cannot change the field type of a field unless the field was
just added using the Add button (see above). Once you select
the Save button (see below), field types become permanent.
DELETE BUTTON
This button deletes the highlighted field from the category. You
can delete a field of any type except a name field type.
 
Caution: If you are editing an existing category, the field is
deleted from every existing item and any data in the field is lost
once you select the Save button (see below). If you want to
transfer this existing data to a new field with the type you want,
use the File-Export-By Category command to export the data
values from the old field, define a new field with the type you
want, and then use File-Import to import the data values. After
you do this, you can safely delete the old field.
 
Similarly, Commence deletes a field from any detail forms and
views that use the category.
 
If you have any agents that depend on or use the field you
deleted, you should edit the agent and ensure that it still
functions as intended (this includes the predefined agents
delivered with Commence). See Customize-Database-Agent.
SAVE BUTTON
The changes you make to category definitions are not saved
until you select this button. Once you select the Save button,
Commence saves the new category definition or changes the
definition of the edited category; it also updates an existing
category's detail form(s) and any views that use the category
with the changed category definition. Commence creates an
initial form and default report view for a new category definition.
ADVANCED BUTTON
This button displays the Advanced Category Options dialog box,
from which you can specify a clarify field and create secondary
indices.
Calculation Field Using the Fields button and the
arithmetic operators + (add), - (subtract), * (multiply),
and / (divide), insert an equation for the calculation
field into the Equation text box.
 
Calculation fields can contain a formula using up to 256
characters, including the +, -, *, and / operators, parentheses ( )
for grouping, and the currency symbol selected via the Windows
Control Panel (in the United States and some other countries, this
is the dollar sign $).
 
The Fields button displays the Select Field dialog box, from
which you select an existing currency, number, date, or time field
to insert into the equation. All fields for the equation must already
be defined to be used in the equation. All inserted fields must be
separated by one of the arithmetic operators.
Check Box Field
When adding or editing a category, you can select the Initial
State of a check box field by selecting one of the Checked or Not
Checked radio buttons. The default is Not Checked.
 
Agents with Edit Item or Add Item actions can be used to check or
uncheck a checkbox. When inserting a Value for a checkbox field
on the Field Values dialog box, the entire contents of the Value
text box must contain values of On, 1, True, or Yes to indicate a
Checked condition; anything else is interpreted as a Not
Checked condition.
 
Note: In Agents, a value of Checked does not indicate a Checked
condition; it will be interpreted as Not Checked.
Data/Excel Cell/Image File Field These three field
types have identical options.
 
Options are limited to a Mandatory Field check box. If you turn
on the Mandatory Field check box, Commence will not let you
save an item detail on which this field appears unless there is a
value in this field.
Date Field
If you enter a value into the Default text box, this value will be
displayed as the default value for this field whenever you add a
new item to the category. Default values for a date field must be
either a date in the format set via the Windows Control Panel, or
a natural language date less than 255 characters. See Natural
Language Dates for more information.
 
The valid date range accepted by Commence extends from
January 1, 1600, through December 31, 2999. This makes it easy
to add the birthday of a favorite classical composer to a musical
library database.
 
With the expanded range of valid dates available, the Short Date
Range preference (Edit- Preferences - Other - Short Date
Range) takes on greater importance when evaluating a two–digit
year within a date field. For example, if the Short Date Range
preference is set to be 1930–2029, then the date 25 Jul 49 would
be evaluated as July 25, 1949. However, if the Short Date
Range preference is set to be 1950–2049, then the date 25 Jul
49 would be evaluated as July 25, 2049.
 
If you turn on the Mandatory Field check box, Commence will
not let you save an item detail on which this field appears unless
there is a value in this field.
 
If you turn on the Recurring Date check box, a Recurring Item
check box will appear on any detail form that includes this field.
See Date Field for a description of how the Recurring Item check
box and the recurring date field are used.
E-Mail Address Field
This field type that is used specifically for electronic mail (E–Mail)
addresses. Double clicking on an address within this field will
open up a blank mail note (using the default e–mail software) with
the To: field automatically filled in with the selected address.
Commence allows up to eighty (80) characters for each e–mail
address
In order for Commence to automatically address an electronic
message, a compatible electronic mail program must be installed
and properly configured. Some examples of supported e–mail
applications are Microsoft Exchange, Lotus Notes, and Lotus
cc:Mail.
Once Commence has been configured properly with the e–mail
information, the next step is to include e–mail address information
in a database. If there are multiple mail system protocols in use, a
prefix can be used in order to identify which protocol is to be
used. For example, entering MAPI:fred will use MAPI protocol to
send an e–mail message to address fred. In addition to MAPI,
Commence recognizes VIM and CMC. The corresponding mail
programs must be installed and configured properly in order to
take advantage of this feature.
Complete the following information on the E-Mail Address Add
Field Dialog Box:
Field Label - this is the name of the field and will be used in all
instances where field labels are displayed.
Default - if there is a default address used, enter that address in
this area. This address will be stored in the E-Mail field in the
event no other e-mail address is entered into the field.
Mandatory Field - if an e-mail address is required information,
checking this box will assure that an item is not saved with an
empty E-Mail field.
The new E–Mail Address field is automatically added to all Detail
Forms associated with the category. If there are multiple tabs for
any of the Detail Forms, the field is automatically added to the
appropriate tab.
Internet Address (URL) Field
Commence includes a field that is used specifically for Uniform
Resource Locator (URL) addresses. Double clicking on a URL
address will launch the Web Browser (if not already open) and go
directly to the indicated web site. Commence allows up to 1024
characters for each URL address.
In order for Commence to automatically display a homepage at a
specific URL address, a compatible Internet Browser must be
installed and properly configured. Two examples of supported
browsers are Microsoft Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator.
Note
Commence uses the web browser that is defined as the default
browser.
 
For proper launching of any web browser, the full URL address
must be specified. For example, http://www.commence.com
must be specified, not just commence.com.
 
Complete the following information on the URL Address’ Add
Field dialog box:
Field Label – this is the name of the field, and will be used in all
instances where Field Labels are displayed. In this example, the
Field Label will be Home Page.
 
Default – if there is a default URL address to be used, enter that
address in this area. This address will be stored in the Home
Page field in the event no other URL address is entered into the
field.
 
Mandatory Field – if an Internet (URL) address is required
information, checking this box will assure that an item is not
saved with an empty Home Page field.
Number/Telephone/Time/E-Mail Address/Internet
Address Field
These five field types have identical options.
 
If you enter a value into the Default text box, this value will be
displayed as the default value for this field whenever you add a
new item to the category. Default values are limited to 255
characters, but are also limited by the type of the field (i.e a time
field must contain a time in the currently selected Windows
Control Panel format, or one of the time keywords listed in
Natural Language Times).
 
If you turn on the Mandatory Field check box, Commence will
not let you save an item detail on which this field appears unless
there is a value in this field.
Selection Field
A Selection Field may be displayed in one of two possible ways.
In situations where there are eight (8) or fewer choices, a Radio
Group can be used. For situations where there are more than
eight (8) choices, or when space within a detail form is limited, a
Combo Box should be used.
RADIO GROUP
The Options for a radio group field include a label for each of
eight possible radio buttons, and a Default radio group from
which you select the radio button you want selected by default
upon display of an add item detail that shows this field.
Type a label into the text box for each button that you want to
define. Only the buttons you label will appear in the radio group.
Caution: When you are editing radio group fields, special care
must be taken when attempting to change the number or order of
radio buttons, or the meaning of a radio button that already has
data associated with it. See Editing a Radio Group.
Agents with Edit Item or Add Item actions can be used to select
any button in a radio group. When inserting a Value for a radio
group field on the Field Values dialog box, the entire contents of
the Value text box must contain the label of one of the radio
group's buttons, or the value will be ignored. The button label is
case sensitive. If the value is ignored, the default button will be
used. Note that you can specify a field code from the trigger data
to be used as a value for the radio group, but the trigger data
field's value must translate into a button name or it will be
ignored.
COMBO BOX
Each combo box can have up to 4000 selections from which to
choose. Each individual entry may be 60 characters long. Define
the Combo Box Selections as follows:
Add - adds a Combo box selection to the list of current
selections.
Edit - permits the Combo Box selection currently highlighted to
be modified.
Move Up - moves the currently selected Combo Box selection up
a position within the list of current selections. Used for
customizing the order in which all selections are positioned.
Move Down - moves the currently selected Combo Box selection
down a position within the list of current selections. Used for
customizing the order in which all selections are positioned.
Caution: Once a selection has been defined within a Combo Box,
it cannot be deleted later. If a selection becomes unnecessary at
a later date, the text associated with the location can be edited
(for example, to read Unused or Unavailable). Modifying the text
for a single location does not affect the text for any other location.
The obsolete selection (now labeled Unused) may then be
moved down to the bottom of the list so that it is “out of the way.”
Sequence Number Field
The Options for a sequence number field are limited to an Initial
Value. This value is placed in the field for the first item added,
and is incremented by one with each subsequent item added. The
default Initial Value is 1. When adding a new sequence number
field, you can change the Initial Value to any numeric value less
than 2,000,000,000.
 
Note: You change the initial value for an existing field by deleting
the sequence number field and readding it. Any existing items in
the category will be resequenced starting with the new initial
value.
Text Field
The Total Size of a text field is, by default, Small (eighty
characters or fewer). Alternatively, you can select a Large text
field (up to 30,000 characters), or select the Limit to option and
type a number of characters in the text box provided. Commence
will limit text input for the field to the number of characters you
specify.
 
If you enter a value into the Default text box, this value will be
displayed as the default value for this field whenever you add a
new item to the category. Default values are limited to 255
characters or the Total Size you specify, whichever is smaller.
 
If you turn on the Mandatory Field check box, Commence will
not let you save an item detail on which this field appears unless
there is a value in this field.
Timer Trigger
A Timer trigger fires at a given date and time, or at a given
frequency. The Timer trigger does not depend on data in
Commence, so its specification is limited to selecting the date and
time parameters. Use the Timer Frequency drop-down list box to
select the timer frequency. Depending on your choice of
frequency, you can also specify Time, Date, Day, Month, and
Year values with the other controls in the Timer Information
section.
 
If you check Trigger if Missed, then if Commence is not active
when the trigger should have fired, it fires as soon as Commence
is restarted. However, the trigger only fires one time, even if
several trigger times were missed.
 
A Timer trigger does not pass a trigger item to the agent's
actions.
 
Timer triggers are often useful in conjunction with data
conditions. They let you define agents that monitor data
conditions of interest to you on a regular basis. For example, a
complete agent of this type might be: every Monday at 9 AM, if I
have any meetings with my manager this week, show me a
warning message and print a listing of those meetings.
Template Mapping Without Sample Files
If you selected one of the file formats from the Template Definition
dialog box that does not use a sample file, Commence displays
the Template Mapping dialog box described below.
See Template Mapping With Sample Files for a description of this
dialog box as it appears when you are using one of the file
formats that uses a sample file.
Unless you are using the column-delimited ASCII format, the
Field Position button will be unavailable.
Use the Template Mapping dialog box to make the field names
in the Fields In Template list box mirror the field contents in your
external file.
When you first see this dialog box, all the fields in your target
category are displayed in the Fields Not In Template list box. To
select a field for your template, highlight a field and select either
the Append Field or Insert Field button. The Append Field
button moves the highlighted field to the bottom of the Fields in
Template list. The Insert Field button moves the highlighted field
to the highlighted location in the Fields in Template list.
A special <skip> entry also appears in the Fields Not in
Template list box. Insert or Append this entry into the Fields in
Template list box to tell Commence to skip over a field in the
external file. Unlike field names, you can select the <skip> entry
as many times as you need to.
To remove a field from the Fields in Template list box, highlight
the field and select the Remove Field button. The field name will
jump to the bottom of the Fields Not In Template list box.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field name in the Fields
Not In Template list box to append it to the Field In Template list
box without selecting the Append Field button. Double-click a
field name in the Fields In Template list box to remove it to the
Field Not In Template list box without selecting the Remove
Field button.
When you have finished mapping all of your fields, select OK to
return to the Template Definition dialog box.
If you are using column delimited ASCII format, see the Field
Position dialog box for an explanation of the Field Position
button.
Caution: The order of the fields in the Fields In Template list box
must match the order of the fields in the external file. Otherwise
you will get the wrong information loaded into your category's
fields. For example, you may get telephone numbers loaded into
the name field in your Person category.
Template Mapping With Sample Files
If you choose either the dBASE, sample file or the DIF, sample
file format on the Template Definition dialog box, Commence
displays the Select Import/Export Sample File dialog box when
you select the Map button.
If you choose the OLE DB/ODBC data source format,
Commence displays the Select Data Source dialog box when you
select the Map button. This is followed by the Select Table dialog
box which allows you to pick a specific table within the data
source.
After selecting a file or specifying the data source and table for an
ODBC database, the Template Mapping dialog box described
below is displayed.
Commence retrieves the field names of the data from the external
file or database. Therefore Commence is able to display the
external field names in the Fields in Template list box as an aid
to mapping the corresponding field names in your Commence
category.
To map an external field to the corresponding field in Commence,
first highlight the external field name, which appears on the left
half of the screen in the Fields in Template list box. Then
highlight the corresponding Commence field from the Fields Not
In Template list box and select the Assign Field button. The
Commence field name moves to the Files in Template list box
alongside the matching external field.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields Not In
Template list box to assign it to the highlighted field in the Fields
In Template list box.
A special <Skip Field> entry also appears in the Fields Not in
Template list box. This performs the same function as the
Unassign button. If you make a mistake in assigning Commence
field names, highlight the field in the Fields In Template list box
you want to unassign and select the Unassign button or the
<Skip Field> entry from the Fields Not In Template list box. The
Commence field will move to the bottom of the list in the Fields
Not In Template list box.
When you have finished mapping all your fields, select OK to
return to the Template Definition dialog box.
Mapping fields to Microsoft Outlook Calendar
This preference allows you to configure your Commence
database to share meetings and contacts with Outlook users.
Refer to Configuring Microsoft Outlook for additional setup steps
that must be completed before synchronizing with Microsoft
Outlook.
 
In order for Commence to copy data back and forth between
applications, the fields in Commence must be mapped to the
equivalent fields in Outlook. These field mappings will be used
during the synchronizations with Outlook to ensure that the
correct data is mapped to and stored in the appropriate field in
each application. Only those fields that will be used need to be
mapped.
 
To map Outlook fields to the corresponding fields in Commence:
1 Select the Edit-Preferences-Other Apps command. From the
Configure Commence as: Combo Box, select Microsoft
Outlook Calendar.
2 From the Category Combo Box, select the Commence
category that is to be used as the calendar. This category
should have a Date and Time field. Typically, this would be
the Calendar category.
3 Double click on the desired Outlook Field on the left side of
the form, or highlight the desired Outlook Field on the left
and select Edit. Select the corresponding Commence Field
from the Combo Box. Select OK when done.
4 Repeat the steps above for any remaining Outlook fields that
correspond to Commence Fields. Not all fields need to be
mapped.
The Sync Condition lets you specify a checkbox or connection
field to determine if an item should be included in the Outlook
synchronization. If a checkbox is used, then only those items
with the box checked will synchronize to Outlook. If a
connection is used, it must be mapped to the connection
between the selected category and the category used to
store your Personal Information (a.k.a., the Me item). Only
items connected to the Me item will synchronize with
Outlook. If the Sync Condition is not mapped, all items in the
selected category will synchronize.
The Activity Type looks for a selection field with a value of
“Appointment”. This is used when the Commence category
that contains your appointments is the same category used
to store your to-do’s. If not mapped, all items in the selected
category are included in the Outlook synchronization.
5 When the appropriate Outlook fields have been mapped to
Commence Fields, select Done to save the configuration.
Mapping fields to Microsoft Outlook Contacts
This preference allows you to configure your Commence
database to share meetings and contacts with Outlook users.
Refer to Configuring Microsoft Outlook for additional setup steps
that must be completed before synchronizing with Microsoft
Outlook.
 
In order for Commence to copy data back and forth between
applications, the fields in Commence must be mapped to the
equivalent fields in Outlook. These field mappings will be used
during the synchronizations with Outlook to ensure that the
correct data is mapped to and stored in the appropriate field in
each application. Only those fields that will be used need to be
mapped.
 
To map Outlook fields to the corresponding fields in Commence:
1 Select the Edit-Preferences-Other Apps command. From the
Configure Commence as: Combo Box, select Microsoft
Outlook Contacts.
2 From the Category Combo Box, select the Commence
category that contains contact information. Typically, this
would be the Person/Company category.
3 Double click on the desired Outlook Field on the left side of
the form, or highlight the desired Outlook Field on the left
and select Edit.
4 Select the corresponding Commence Field from the Combo
Box. Select OK when done.
5 Repeat the steps above for any remaining Outlook fields that
correspond to Commence Fields. Not all fields need to be
mapped.
6 When the appropriate Outlook fields have been mapped to
Commence Fields, select Done to save the configuration.
Mapping fields to Microsoft Outlook Tasks
This preference allows you to configure your Commence
database to share Task items with Outlook users. Refer to
Configuring Microsoft Outlook for additional setup steps that must
be completed before synchronizing with Microsoft Outlook.
 
In order for Commence to copy data back and forth between
applications, the fields in Commence must be mapped to the
equivalent fields in Outlook. These field mappings will be used
during the synchronizations with Outlook to ensure that the
correct data is mapped to and stored in the appropriate field in
each application. Only those fields that will be used need to be
mapped.
 
To map Outlook fields to the corresponding fields in Commence:
1 Select the Edit-Preferences-Other Apps command. From the
Configure Commence as: Combo Box, select Microsoft
Outlook Tasks.
2 From the Category Combo Box, select the Commence
category that contains Task information. Typically, this would
be the Activity or To-Do category.
3 Double click on the desired Outlook Field on the left side of
the form, or highlight the desired Outlook Field on the left
and select Edit.
4 Select the corresponding Commence Field from the Combo
Box. Select OK when done.
5 Repeat the steps above for any remaining Outlook fields that
correspond to Commence Fields. Not all fields need to be
mapped.
The Sync Condition lets you specify a checkbox or connection
field to determine if an item should be included in the Outlook
synchronization. If a checkbox is used, then only those items
with the box checked will synchronize to Outlook. If a
connection is used, it must be mapped to the connection
between the selected category and the category used to
store your Personal Information (a.k.a., the Me item). Only
items connected to the Me item will synchronize with
Outlook. If the Sync Condition is not mapped, all items in the
selected category will synchronize.
The Activity Type looks for a selection field with a value of
“Appointment”. This is used when the Commence category
that contains your appointments is the same category used
to store your to-do’s. If not mapped, all items in the selected
category are included in the Outlook synchronization.
6 When the appropriate Outlook fields have been mapped to
Commence Fields, select Done to save the configuration.
Mapping fields for Mobile Link Notes
This preference allows you to configure your Commence
database to synchronize Notes items with your supported
handheld device. Refer to Configuring Mobile Link and Microsoft
Outlook for additional setup steps that must be completed before
synchronizing.
 
In order for Commence to copy data between applications, the
fields in Commence must be mapped to the equivalent fields in
Outlook. These field mappings will be used during the
synchronizations to ensure that the correct data is mapped to and
stored in the appropriate field in each application. Only those
fields that will be used need to be mapped.
 
To map the Notes fields to the corresponding fields in Commence:
1 Select the Edit-Preferences-Other Apps command. From the
Configure Commence as: Combo Box, select Mobile Link
Notes.
2 From the Category Combo Box, select the Commence
category that contains Notes information.
3 Double click on the desired Mobile Link / Outlook Field on
the left side of the form, or highlight the desired field on the
left and select Edit.
4 Select the corresponding Commence Field from the Combo
Box. Select OK when done.
5 Repeat the steps above for any remaining Outlook fields that
correspond to Commence Fields. Not all fields need to be
mapped.
The Sync Condition lets you specify a checkbox or connection
field to determine if an item should be included in the
synchronization.
- If a checkbox is used, then only those items with the box
checked will synchronize.
- If a connection is used, it must be mapped to the
connection between the selected category and the category
used to store your Personal Information (a.k.a., the Me item).
Only items connected to the Me item will synchronize. If the
Sync Condition is not mapped, all items in the selected
category will synchronize.
 
6 When all the necessary fields have been mapped to
Commence Fields, select Done to save the configuration.
Select Item Dialog Box
Highlight the name of the item you want to display in the list box
and select the Select button. Alternatively, you can double-click
the left mouse button while pointing at the name of the item you
want to select it without using the Select button. Select Cancel to
exit the dialog box without choosing an item.
Customize-Design View-Fields Tab (Report Viewer)
Selecting the Customize-Design View command while a report
viewer is the active view displays the Design View tab.
Use the Fields tab to choose which fields will be available in the
report designer. If you select a connection name to appear in the
view, you can choose a field from the connected category.
The Fields in Report and Fields Not In Report list boxes show
the list of fields (including connection definitions) that appear in
the designer and those that don't appear in the designer,
respectively.
To add a field to the list of fields in the view, highlight the field
name in the Fields Not In Report list box and select the Append
Field or Insert Field button. The order of fields does not matter.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields Not In
Report list box to append it to the Fields In Report list.
If the field you select is a connection definition, you can choose to
display any of the fields from the connected item in the view. For
example, you could show the name and phone number of each
person assigned to a To-Do item by highlighting Assigned to
Person in the Fields Not In Report list box and selecting either
the Insert Field or Append Field button. Commence displays a
list box containing the list of fields in the connected category.
Select the name and phone number fields, one field at a time,
from the list. Note that connection definitions in the connected
category are not displayed in the list box. You can only display
items that are directly connected to the category the view is
defined for.
To remove a field from the view, highlight the field name in the
Fields In Report list box and select the Remove Field button.
Shortcut: Double-click the mouse on a field in the Fields In
Report list box to remove it without selecting the Remove Field
button.
The Combine Fields button is not available for report viewers.
Instead, fields can be combined using the Report Designer.
Use the Report Designer to arrange the fields in the report and to
customize the report layout.
Combine Fields Dialog Box
See Also
The Combine Fields button is used to display up to 4 fields on the
same line of a book or report view. When selecting connection
fields, the Name field type is automatically selected. Connected
fields other than the Name field are not supported. The
Separator: text box is used to enter a delimiter between each of
the fields you have selected. This box may be left blank if the
fields must appear side by side with no spaces in between.
For example, when creating a report view that will be used to print
labels and envelopes, the First and Last Name fields must be
displayed on the same line. To combine these fields, select First
Name from the Field 1: list box, select Last Name from the Field
2: list box. Enter a space in the Separator:. Box. Click OK to
save the combined field.
 
Note: Combined fields will automatically be appended after the
last field in the report. Combined fields cannot be inserted into a
different position. When designing a report, plan ahead so that
the combined field is placed in the correct position. After a
combined field has been placed (and appears under Fields in
Report), other fields may be appended or inserted around the
combined field in the report.
Adding a Text Template
When you select the Add Text button on the Letter Template tab,
you see a blank Letter Template dialog box.
 
Use the text box in the Letter Template dialog box to type in the
text that you want in the body of the letter template. You can use
the Edit menu commands to copy text to and from the Windows
Clipboard. You can also use the Clipboard to copy text into the
template from other applications. If you want, you can leave the
template dialog box open, do other work in Commence, and then
return to finish the template.
Keyboard shortcut: To move the cursor out of the text box, press
ALT+underlined-letter, where underlined-letter is one of the
underlined letters in a button or text box label.
 
FOR CATEGORY
Use the For Category drop-down list box to select the category
with which the template will be used.
TEMPLATE NAME
Enter a brief description for the template in the Template Name
text box.
FIELD
When you want to include data from an item in Commence,
position your cursor where you want the data to appear. Then
select the Field button. (See the Select Field dialog box for more
information about how to use this.) A Field Code will be inserted
in the body of your letter template. This code is substituted when
you create your letter, and tells Commence to get data from the
category you chose for your letter template.
 
There are four special Field Codes that can be used in text letter
templates only.
(-Category-) inserts the category of the item being used to supply
data values.
(-Date-) inserts the current date (that is, the date when the letter
was created).
(-Time-) inserts the current time.
(-Me-) inserts the item name from your Personal Info preference.
SPELL
When you have entered all the text and Field Codes that you
want in the template, you can check the spelling in the template
by selecting the Spell button. See Tools-Spell Check for details
on the use of the spell checker.
SAVE
Select the Save button to save the template. The template is now
ready to use to send letters.
CANCEL
If you select the Cancel button, Commence cancels the add
template operation and does not save the file or the name of the
template.
Editing a Text Template
When you select the Edit button on the Letter Template tab with a
text template highlighted, you see the Letter Template dialog box
filled out with the contents of the template. The file name of the
template is shown in the upper right hand corner of the box. You
can make changes to the template by simply typing new text in
the text box.
FIELD
You can use the Field button to add new field codes to the
template (see the Select Field dialog box for how to do this).
 
Note: If a text template references a connected field and multiple
items are connected to the data item for which a letter is being
created, data from just the first connected item is entered into the
letter.
FOR CATEGORY
If you want to use the template with a different category, select
the new category with the For Category drop-down list box.
TEMPLATE NAME
To change the name of the template, type a new description in
the Template Name text box.
SPELL
If you want to spell check your changes, select the Spell button
(see Tools-Spell Check for instructions on using the Spell
Checker).
SAVE
When you are ready to save the template, select the Save button.
CANCEL
If you don't want to save your changes, select the Cancel button.
Commence Event Trigger
See Also
The Commence Event trigger enables agents to run whenever
Commence starts or closes. This trigger makes it easier to write
agents to perform initialization and cleanup tasks.
 
If you choose to trigger on event: Commence starts, then the
agent will fire immediately upon starting Commence, but only if
the database in which the agent is defined is the active database.
You can ensure that the correct database is opened when
Commence starts by using either the /prompt or the /database=
command line options. Otherwise, Commence will open the last
database that was active when you last exited from Commence.
Using Open/Manage Database to open the correct database
later will not trigger the agent.
 
If you select to trigger on event: Commence closes, then the
agent will not attempt to fire until you try to exit from Commence.
Then, once the agent starts to fire, Commence will remain open
until the agent has completed its actions. You can exit a number
of different ways, by selecting Exit from the Commence
Application menu, or by double-clicking on the Control box in the
upper left corner of the Commence window, or by clicking on the
close button in the upper right corner of the Commence window.
 
Warning: Do not attempt to reboot your PC if an agent is firing.
Incoming Communication Trigger
The Incoming Communication trigger allows you to detect when
you have received new mail in your E-Mail inbox. The E-Mail
application does not need to be running for this trigger to work;
Commence, however, must be open to the database where the
agent is defined. Along with this trigger, there are several new
keywords that can be used in actions.
 
The Incoming Communication trigger can also be setup to
detect when the telephone has rung. The incoming phone call can
be logged, using several new keywords that can be used in
actions.
Item Alarm Trigger
The Item Alarm trigger works as a warning signal. It is fired (at
an interval that you select) before an item (an Calendar
appointment, for example) becomes current. The specification of
an Item Alarm trigger consists of identifying which items generate
alarms, and how far in advance the alarm trigger goes off. All
Item Alarm triggers work within a single category (e.g., Project,
Calendar, etc.). You must also identify the date and time fields in
the category that are used to set the alarm.
You can set an Item Alarm trigger for items in a view or in a
category. Make this selection by picking the View or Category
radio button under For Items In.
If you select View, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your current views. Note that selecting a view
determines the category of the view.
If you select Category, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your categories. You can just set the alarm for any
item in the category, or you can restrict it to a filtered sub-set of
the category. Use the Select Filter button to bring up the Filters
tab and define a filter for that category.
After you have selected a view or category, you must pick the
date and time fields that will be used for the item alarm. Based on
your choice of view or category, the Trigger If section of the box
lets you select these fields. Use the drop-down list box next to
The date in field: to pick the date field. Use the drop-down list
box next to and the time in field: to pick the time field.
Set the amount of time before the value in the time field that the
trigger will fire by adjusting the values in the hour(s) and
minute(s) controls. (You can use the arrows to move the values
up and down, or just type in a number.)
If you check Trigger if Missed, then if Commence is not active
when the trigger should have fired, it fires as soon as Commence
is restarted.
An Item Alarm trigger passes the data item that activated it as a
trigger item.
Keyboard Hotkey Trigger
A Keyboard Hotkey trigger is manually controlled: it fires when
you select the keystroke combination associated with the trigger.
You can also specify which desktop the agent will be available.
 
To avoid conflicts, the keyboard combination must include CTRL
+ ALT+ <key> or CTRL + SHIFT + <key> when using letters.
However, function keys and numeric keypad keys can appear
alone or in any combination with SHIFT, CTRL, or ALT. Also note
that Commence will only process the keystroke combination if it is
the active application.
Some sample keystroke combinations are:
CTRL + ALT + A CTRL + SHIFT + K
CTRL + SHIFT + HOME
F3
SHIFT + F3
ALT + F5
NUM 3 (3 on the numeric keypad) WARNING Do not try to
define CTRL + ALT + DEL as a keystroke combination. Also,
avoid using other system keystroke combinations (such as
ALT+TAB, CTRL+F6, etc)
Some combinations are used by other applications, including
Windows, and should not be used. Using these can cause
unpredictable results. The following is a list of some of the key
combinations that you cannot use.
CTRL + SHIFT + INSERT
CTRL + SHIFT + DELETE
CTRL + SHIFT + HOME
CTRL + SHIFT + END
CTRL + SHIFT + PAGEUP
CTRL + SHIFT + PAGEDOWN
CTRL + SHIFT + LEFTARROW
CTRL + SHIFT + RIGHTARROW
CTRL + SHIFT + UPARROW
CTRL + SHIFT + DOWNARROW
CTRL + F4…F10
ALT + TAB
CTRL + ESC
 
A Keyboard Hotkey trigger can be associated with a specific
category (e.g., Person/Company) using the Active Category
drop-down list box. If you make this association, then the menu
item is only enabled when either a view of the category or an item
detail from that category is active. If another category is active,
the menu item is grayed out. If you check All Categories, then
the menu pick can always be selected, regardless of the active
category.
 
A Keyboard Hotkey trigger that is associated with a category
passes data from a single item in that category as trigger data.
This trigger item is either the selected data item in a view, or the
data item from the displayed item detail that has the focus.
Receive DDE Trigger
See Also
A Receive DDE trigger is fired by a user-specified DDE message
from another Windows application. When Commence receives a
DDE "FireTrigger" execute message, it checks the message text
to see if it matches any active DDE trigger. If a match is found,
the trigger is fired. The only specification required for a DDE
trigger is the message text.
 
To fire a DDE trigger from another Windows application, the
application must initiate a DDE conversation with Commence.
Enter the text that you want to fire the trigger in the Agent
Message Text Received by DDE text box.
 
No trigger item is passed from this trigger to an agent's actions.
 
Receive DDE triggers let you initiate agent processing within
Commence from other Windows applications. Commence agents
can also send DDE messages to other applications with the Send
DDE action. Using these DDE-based facilities allows you to build
cross-application systems that can link your work in Commence
to tasks done with other applications.
 
You can pass arguments to be used by the agent actions. The
arguments passed via a DDE trigger are accessible using the
following keyword strings: (-0-), (-1-), (-2-), (-3-), (-4-), (-5-), (-6-),
(-7-), (-8-), and (-9-). These keyword strings may be used to
display the passed arguments using a message box or status bar
action, to set values in an Add or Edit Item action or any other
place that keyword replacement is allowed in agents. The
following example illustrates how the DDE trigger arguments are
mapped to keywords.
[FireTrigger(TrigStr, Arg2, Arg3, Arg4, Arg5, Arg6, Arg7,
Arg8, Arg9)]
(-0-) = Always FireTrigger
(-1-) = Trigger String, e.g., TrigStr
(-2-) through (-9-) = The string passed in that position, e.g.,
Arg2 through Arg9 respectively.
The DDE trigger also allows arguments 2 and 3 to be mapped to
a category name and an item name respectively. If the "arg2
equals" check box is checked (in the DDE Trigger definition dialog
box), a category must be selected and Arg2 must equal that
category name for that DDE trigger to fire. In addition, Arg3 must
be the name of an item in the chosen category. If all of these
conditions are met, the trigger fires and values from that item will
be available for use in the agent's actions using the field name
keywords such as (%Name%).
 
It is also possible to define a filter for a DDE trigger using the item
mapping option (described above). Press the Select Filter button
to bring up the Filters tab and define a filter for that category. If a
filter is defined, not only do Arg2 and Arg3 have to match the
category and an item name, but the item must also meet the filter
criteria. If the item does not match the filter, the trigger will not
fire.
Field Summary Condition
A Field Summary condition generates a summary value for all
the fields in the view or category selected for the condition and
compares it to a value. The field being summarized must be a
calculation or number field. The sum or the average of the
individual fields is compared to the condition's value. If the
summarized value meets the specified criteria, then the condition
is true.
Select either View or Category under For Items In... to specify
the items that are checked by the condition.
If you select View, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your current views. Note that selecting a view
determines the category of the view.
If you select Category, a drop-down list box appears that lets you
select one of your categories. If you want to limit the condition
test to a sub-set of the category, use the Select Filter button to
bring up the Filters tab. Now you can define a filter for that
category.
Use the controls under Trigger If... to define the field summary
and the value. Use the Values in drop-down list box to choose
the data field that will be summarized. Select either the total or
average radio button to sum or average the values respectively.
Select the type of comparison to the condition value by selecting
one of the following radio buttons: more than, exactly, or less
than. Enter the condition value to be used in the comparison in
the Value text box.
When a Field Summary condition is true, it passes all the items
in its view, category or filtered category as condition items.
Field Summary conditions are useful for monitoring totals or
averages for any fields that are numeric. Use the condition's view
or filter specification to select the subset of items that you want
included in the summary.
Time Interval Condition
A Time Interval condition tests whether or not the current time
falls within a specified date and time interval. The condition's date
interval can be defined as a specific date range, or as a repeating
day interval using the controls in the Date Interval section of the
dialog box. The time interval for the dates selected is set in the
Time Interval section.
 
To set an interval between specific dates, select the From radio
button in the Date Interval section. Enter the start date and end
date of the interval in the two text boxes to the right. To set an
interval based on days of the week, select the Days radio button.
Select the days of the week using the check boxes. If you select
All, the other day check boxes are grayed out until you uncheck
All.
 
To select all times for the date interval, check the All Times
check box: the other controls in the Time Interval section will gray
out. To select a time interval, uncheck All Times and use the
increment controls to the right of Start Time and End Time to
specify the time interval. (You can either use the arrow controls or
just type the values into the boxes.)
 
A Time Interval condition does not pass any condition data.
 
Time Interval conditions are often useful for defining or limiting
the times when an agent will operate.
Field Values Dialog Box
See Also
This dialog box is displayed when you need to select field values
for an agent action from the Add Action or Edit Action dialog
boxes.
 
For an Add Item or Edit Item action, the Field Values dialog box
allows you to select field values for the item to be added or edited
by the action. You must do this for any mandatory fields in the
category to which an item is added if these mandatory fields do
not have default values (this will be at least the name field).
 
Note: You can avoid specifying field values at all by turning on the
Display Item(s) check box on the Add or Edit Action dialog box.
 
You can select field values in one of two ways: type the value
directly into the Values text box, or use the Insert Field button (if
present; this button does not appear if no data is passed from the
agent's trigger).
 
The Fields list box shows a list of all the valid fields for the
category selected for the add or edit item action. Select the field
for which you want to specify a value by highlighting it in the
Fields list box.
 
Type the value you want for the highlighted field in the Value text
box. You must observe the value restrictions for the field type or
the data you specify is ignored when the add or edit item action is
executed (see the list of field types, below).
 
You can also specify Field Codes which are replaced with the
actual field values from the an item's data. Field Codes are either;
the name of a field enclosed in parentheses and percent
characters: (%Field Name%); or a special Field Code enclosed in
parentheses and dash characters. These special Field Codes can
be used with any category; an example is the ( Date ) Code which
will generate the current date. The action defined for the agent
determines which substitutions take place when the agent
operates. See Using Field Codes in Actions for the basics of
using field codes in agent actions.
 
When you select a text field in the Fields list box the Value text
box becomes a large edit box. To enter multi-line text, keep typing
and Commence will automatically word-wrap the text lines for
you. If you want to insert carriage returns in the Value text box,
simply press Return wherever you want a carriage return, then
continue typing. If you use the Insert Fields button to select field
values, you may wish to separate each field value with a carriage
return.
 
If data is passed to the action from the trigger, you can also select
the Insert Field button to insert Field Codes from the passed
data into the Value text box. The name of the category from
which the data is passed is shown above the Insert Field button
in the lower right of the box. Selecting this button displays the
Select Field dialog box. You should be careful that the type of the
field you choose from the trigger data matches the type of the
field you select from the Select Field dialog box, or the data will
be ignored when the item is added or edited (with the exception
of check box fields; see the list of fields below).
 
If the value you specify for a mandatory field is ignored and the
field has a default value, the default value is assigned to the field
when the item is added or edited. If the value you specify for a
mandatory field is ignored and the field does not have a default
value, an error is posted to the Message Log, and the item will
not be added (or, edited as you intended).
 
If you do not highlight a field and enter a Value for it at all, the
default value for that field is used for the new item, if a default is
defined (edit the category from which the trigger data is taken
using Customize-Database-Category to see which fields have
default values). Again, you will be required to enter values for all
mandatory fields in the added/edited item's category that do not
have a default value defined.
 
Calculations can be specified in the Value text box for any
number type field. For example, if you have a number type field
named Number, you can define an agent that adds a new item
with a Number value one greater than the Number value in an
item selected by the agent's condition(s). The Value is:
(%Number%). + 1
The operators allowed in agent field value specifications are the
same as the operators allowed in calculation fields (, , , ).
Parentheses are allowed for grouping.
 
The following is a list of all the available field types. To see a
definition of the capabilities of the field, select the field type name
below. To see a description of the field's options as they appear in
this dialog box, as well as an explanation of valid field Values,
select the word Options next to the field type whose options you
want to see.
 
Check Box Options
Connection Definition Options
Data File Options
Date Options
Excel Cell Options
Image Options
Number Options
Selection Options
Sequence Number Options
Telephone Options
Text Options
Time Options
 
When you have set all the fields you wish to edit, select OK to
save your work and return to the New or Edit Action dialog box.
If you select Cancel, the previous values will be restored.
Define E-Mail Dialog Box
The Recipient field contains an electronic mail address. The
Insert Field button inserts an item value parameter such as "
(%E-mail%)" into the field. Commence does no validation on the
address placed in this field. Any text is accepted and passed on
to the e-mail package.
Only one recipient may be placed in this field. The Create E-Mail
dialog box offers a choice of using the trigger or a condition as a
source of data values. This choice is shown by a radio group
labeled "To Recipients Specified Using:". If your Create E-Mail
action is defined with "To Recipients Specified Using: Trigger",
one e-mail message will be created when the agent fires. If your
Create E-Mail action is defined with "To Recipients Specified
Using: Condition 1 or 2", one e-mail message will be sent for
each item matching the condition. Alternatively, the value placed
in the recipient field may be the name of a list of recipients such
as "My Department" if such a list is defined within your electronic
mail program.
Note: If you have multiple e-mail packages installed on your
system that use different protocols, you can target a
message to use a specific mail server protocol by preceding
the recipient's e-mail address with one of the following
strings: "VIM:", "MAPI:" or "CMC:".
The Subject of the message summarizes its contents. The Insert
Field button next to the Subject field inserts an item value
parameter such as "(%Name%)" into the field.
The text of the message may be created using a text letter
template or by entering text directly. If you select the Use Letter
Template option, you can select a text letter template from the
drop-down list. To create a text letter template, use the
Customize-Database-Letter Template command. More
information on creating letter templates may be found in the
Commence User's Guide.
If you select the Text option, you can type in a message directly.
You can insert item values into the text field using Insert Field.
If you select the Preview before sending check box, you will be
given the opportunity to enter or modify the message within your
e-mail package before it is actually sent. While previewing a
message, you are able to enter or change its recipients, subject,
text or attachments. You are also given the option of canceling
the message.
Any message fields can be left blank when the message is
created in Commence. If you use Preview before sending, you
will have a second chance to fill in blank fields before the
message is sent. Any field can be left blank when the message is
sent except Recipients.
You can send one file along with a message by selecting Attach
File and giving the path of the file to be sent. Although no Insert
Field button is provided for the Attach File box, item value
parameters may be placed in this field such as (%Document%).
Set Snooze Time Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Snooze button
or the Snooze All button from a message box.
 
Enter the number of minutes after which you want the message
box to reappear. The default snooze time is 10 minutes. You can
change the number of minutes you want the message to snooze
by typing a number between 1 and 999 into the text box provided.
Select OK to make the message disappear temporarily. It will
reappear after the designated number of minutes have elapsed.
 
Select Cancel to return to the original message box.
 
Snooze affects only the currently displayed message box, while
Snooze All affects the current message box and all currently
pending message boxes. If you use the Snooze button and there
are pending messages, the next pending message is displayed
when you select OK in the Set Snooze Time dialog box.
Note: The Message Box snooze alarm works only within a
Commence session. That is, if you set a snooze time for a
message box and then exit Commence, the snooze time is lost
and the message box will not reappear when you reopen
Commence.
Message Box Actions Dialog Box
When you select the Action Buttons button in the Add Action or
Edit Action dialog boxes for a Message Box Action, Commence
displays the Message Box Actions dialog box (for a new action,
all the fields will be empty).
 
You can enter text for any of the buttons in the Button 1-4 text
boxes. When you select the corresponding Action button, you get
the normal selection of possible actions; that is you will see a new
Edit Action dialog box (titled Add Message Box Action), with all
the actions available except Message Box). Using this box you
can define an action that will only be performed when you select
the corresponding button in the message box displayed by
Commence. Use the Add Message Box Action dialog box
exactly as you use the Add or Edit Action dialog boxes.
 
Any message box that is displayed can be put back to sleep for a
few minutes by the user before the message box is re-displayed.
This works much the same way the snooze button on an alarm
clock works. This feature is automatically available to the user
whenever an agent-generated message box is displayed.
 
When you are done specifying all the sub-actions for your
message box action, select OK on the Message Box Actions to
save your work and return to the Add or Edit Action dialog box.
Select Cancel if you don't want your message box actions saved.
Letter File Storage
Commence stores letter files in a location on your hard disk that
depends on whether you view the letter, print the letter with
logging turned on, or print a letter with logging turned off. The first
two alternatives save a permanent copy of the letter(s) viewed or
printed; the third alternative saves only a temporary copy.
All letters created by selecting the View button on the Send Letter
dialog box are saved in the directory specified using the Edit-
Preferences-Letter command. This is, by default, the \letters
subdirectory under your Commence program directory.
If you Print a letter, and the Log check box is turned on, then the
letter is stored in the directory referred to above (actually, in the
case of Send Letter to All Items, a copy of the template used to
print the letters is saved, so that the log item can point to a copy
of what was printed).
If you Print a letter, and the Log check box is turned off, then the
letter is stored in the directory specified by your DOS TEMP
environment variable. This variable is usually set to a
subdirectory of your hard disk (such as \temp) using the DOS set
command in your autoexec.bat file.
Commence will, whenever it exits, delete any letter files more
than one day old from the TEMP directory. This keeps unneeded
files from accumulating. If you want to save a letter that
Commence saves in the TEMP directory, you should edit the file,
change its name, and save it to another directory. (Commence
uses strings beginning with ~JJ as file names for saved letter
files).
To improve performance of Commence, you should set the TEMP
variable to a directory only one or two levels down from the root
directory. See your DOS and Windows documentation for details
of the set command, the autoexec.bat file, your hard disk file
system, and Windows performance considerations.
Design Form Display Dialog Box
 
DETAIL FORM NAME
The Detail Form Name identifies the form and must be unique
within a category. It can be up to 16 characters. When adding or
copying a form, this text box is blank; when editing a form, it
contains the current form name
 
DETAIL FORM DESCRIPTION
The Detail Form Description is optional and can be up to 34
characters. When adding or copying a form, this text box is
blank; when editing a form, it contains the current form
description. If you provide a description, it will appear in the
Detail Form Description field in the Detail Forms dialog box.
 
LAUNCH DESIGNER
Press this button to open the Detail Form Design dialog box.You
can customize the form in a number of ways from this screen.
 
SAVE
Select the Save button to save the detail form you are working
on.
 
CANCEL
Select Cancel to cancel the new, edited, or copied detail form
and return to the Detail Form dialog box.
Design Form Advanced Dialog Box
If you select the Form Options button from the Design Form
dialog box, you can:
 
define when a detail form will be used to display an item
select how multi-line fields are printed when you print using
this form
 
FILTER BUTTON
The Filter option for the Auto-Select Detail Form When...
group box lets you define when this form will be used to display
an item. You define the condition using the Filter button, which
displays the Filters dialog box.
 
For example, in the History category, two forms, called Email,
and History, are defined and used when items in the History
category are of these specific types. You can then use the Filter
option on the Detail Form Options dialog box to define a filter
that says "Type equal to E-mail Received” or “Type equal to E-
mail Sent”.
 
Now, whenever you enter a new item detail of the History
category, you see the History Form, which allows you to choose
a type of note. From that point, the item detail is displayed as a
History, or Email Form depending on the chosen type.
 
The Auto Select option overrides the default form for editing
chosen on the Set Default Detail Forms dialog box.
 
MULTILINE FIELD PRINTING
The Multiline Field Printing option lets you control how multi-
line (large) text fields in the form are printed. The Truncate
option tells Commence to only print as much of a multi-line field
as is displayed on the screen. The Expand option says to print
all the text of a multi-line field, regardless of what the screen
display size is for the field.
Design Form Scripting Dialog Box See Also
For an overview of how to use VBScripting, or for detailed
examples and descriptions of the supported VBScript objects, see
the topic titled VBScript.
 
Once you have created a VBScript for a detail form, edit the detail
form then install the script. See Installing a VBScript for detailed
steps. Then the script will automatically execute for that detail
form.
Advanced Category Options Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select the Advanced
button when adding, editing, or copying a Category Definition.
A clarify field designates a secondary field from among the
fields already-defined in the category. This other field should
contain unique data, which will be used by Commence to
distinguish between duplicate items. Having a clarify field is
useful when you have a large number of items in your category
with the same name.
To designate a clarify field for a category, select a field from the
Field drop-down list box.
Any three characters can be used as the Separator. The default
characters are a space, followed by a short dash, followed by a
space. Type a Separator in the text box provided.
Only the Name field can be clarified. The Clarify Field will be
displayed to the right of the item name, and after the chosen
Separator, when you:
assign connections, the list of items in the connected category
will be displayed with the clarify field. (see Customize-
Database-Connection)
select a connection field to filter a view, the list of items in the
connected category will be displayed with the clarify field.
(see Customize-Filter View)
display items in a Gantt view, provided the Clarify Field is not
used as the start date or end date in this view (see
Customize-Design View Fields Tab (Gantt Views))
You can change the clarify field at any time.
A secondary index is most useful when there are very large
amounts of data to be viewed. Commence enables users to
specify an additional two (2) fields that are to be indexed.
Sorting data on a field other than the Name field could consume
a large percentage of the total time needed to open the view. By
using a secondary index field, these sort times can be cut
drastically, thus reducing the amount of time needed to open a
view.
Select the desired Secondary Index Field(s) from the Create
Index On combo box. It is recommended that the Secondary
Index Field be set to the field(s) used most often for sorting the
category.
The following fields are not available for use as Secondary Index
Fields: connections, Data Files, Image, Excel Cell, Calculation,
or Number Fields.
Caution: The use of a secondary index may slow down the
process of saving items slightly.
The Allow Duplicate Names check box lets you specify if items
in the category must have unique names. For example, if this
option is checked, you can add two people to the
Person/Company category that are both named "Jones, Joe".
You must allow duplicate names if you will be using recurring
date fields with this category.
If Allow Duplicate Names isn't checked, name uniqueness is
enforced within the category. If you try to add a second person
named "Jones, Joe" to a category that doesn't allow duplicate
names, Commence will display an error message telling you
there is already an item with that name.
You can change the Allow Duplicate Names value at any time.
There are only two constraints that will keep you from applying
name uniqueness to a category. If your data contains duplicate
names or if a recurring date field is defined for the category,
Commence will display an error message and will not save your
category definition changes until you turn on Allow Duplicate
Names.
If the File-Import command reads an incoming item has a blank
name field, Commence automatically assigns the value (none)
as the item name. To use this feature, make sure that you turn
on Allow Duplicate Names. Also select edit the Import/Export
template and turn on the Add duplicates as new items radio
button on the Import Rules dialog box, so that all of the items
with blank names are imported into the category.
If you allow duplicate names, you may also want to select a
clarify field with the Advanced... button.
Select Field Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select:
 
the Field button from the Letter Template dialog box
the Insert Field button from an Add Action, Edit Action, or
Field Values dialog box
the Fields button when adding or editing a calculation field
in the Add Field or Edit Field dialog boxes.
 
Use this dialog box to choose the field that you want to use in
your letter or agent action. (See Using Field Codes in Templates
for the basics of using field codes in letters. See Using Field
Codes in Actions for the basics of using field codes in agent
actions.)
 
Highlight the field you want to insert from the Fields list box. At
the top of the list are the three special Field Codes that work with
any category: (-Date-), (-Time-), and (-Category-). These
represent the date, time and selected category respectively. The
rest of the fields listed are the fields and connection definitions for
the category.
 
When you turn off the Show Indirect Field check box, the list will
not contain the connection definitions. The names of the
connection definitions are listed with trailing ellipses (e.g., Is
Employed by Company...).
 
When you highlight one of the three special Field Codes or a
name for a direct field (like Name) and select the Select button,
the corresponding Field Code is inserted in the text box on the
previous dialog box at the current insertion point. For example, if
you select Name, then (%Name%) is inserted into the text box.
 
If the connection fields are listed, when you highlight one of them
and select the Select button, Commence displays the Select
Connected Field dialog box, from which you select a field from
the connected category for inclusion in your letter or action.
 
Mouse users can double-click the left mouse button while pointing
at a field to select it without using the Select button.
 
Select Cancel to exit the Select Field dialog box without
selecting a field.
Field Position Dialog Box
If you are using column delimited ASCII file format for an
import/export template, you must assign field positions for the
information to be imported or exported.
 
The dialog box described below is displayed when you select the
Field Position button from the Template Mapping dialog box.
 
Type the column position for the start of the field into the Start
Position edit box. Type the column position for the end of the
field into the End Position edit box. For example, if your first field
begins in column 1 and ends in column 35, enter "1" in Start
Position and "35" in End Position. Select OK to return to the
Template Mapping dialog box.
 
Caution: For column delimited ASCII format, you need to define
the field position for each field listed in the Fields in Templates
list box.
 
When you have defined the positions of all your fields, select OK
to return to the Template Mapping dialog box.
Select Data Source Dialog Box
When you select the Map button from the Template Definition
dialog box, Commence displays this dialog box.
 
Press the Select External Data Source button. A list of installed
OLE DB providers is displayed. Choose the data source that most
closely matches your external database. For example, if you will
be exchanging data with Microsoft Access, choose the “Microsoft
JET OLE DB Provider” for a straightforward setup.
 
Data sources can be configured for a variety of file and database
formats including: dBASE files, Excel files, FoxPro files, MS
Access databases, Visual FoxPro databases and tables, SQL
databases, and Oracle databases.
 
Note: If no applicable data source is listed, you may add one from
Windows Control Panel. Double-click on the ODBC (32bit) icon
and click Add. This launches the ODBC Data Source
Administrator. Press the Help button for detailed assistance.
 
Click Next >> to display the Connection window. Enter any
necessary connection information, such as the path to the
external data source, or the data source name and catalog. If a
login and password is needed to access the data, enter that
information here. Click OK to return to the Select Data Source
dialog box.
 
Select an appropriate Query Mode:
The default option, “Basic (using table selection)”, allows
you to access a table directly by name and use the query
already defined in the external table. Click Next > to display
the Select Table dialog box. Commence will connect via
ODBC and retrieve a list of all available tables from the
external data source. Select a table from the list then click
Finish.
Instead of accessing a table directly by its name using the
“Basic” option above, you may select “Advanced (using
SQL)” to specify a custom SQL statement that is used when
importing data from an external data source. Click Next > to
display the SQL Query dialog box. Enter the SQL query
needed to retrieve the desired table name(s) and the
required fields. Click Finish.
The Template Mapping dialog box is displayed.
Select Table Dialog Box
When you select “Basic (using table selection)” then click the
Next > button from the Select Data Source dialog box,
Commence displays the Select Table dialog box.
 
This option allows you to access a table directly in the data
source by specifying the table name. Commence will retrieve the
columns and records already defined in the external table. Select
a table from the list, then click Finish.
Connection Definition Values
If you select a connection definition in the Fields list box of the
Field Values dialog box, you have several choices for entering
text into the Value text box.
 
You can copy all of the connected items from a connection
definition in a trigger or condition to a connection definition in an
action. You do this by specifying
(%ConnectionName%%CategoryName%%Name%)
You can specify multiple field names to the connection definition
in the action. To do this, enter multiple field names in the Value
text box, each separated by a carriage return. For example, if you
were editing the Employs Person connection in the Company
category and entered:
Jones, Mary
Durkee, Fred
Johnson, Jerry
in the Value text box, assuming all three of these names were
valid Person items, all three people would be connected with the
Company item(s) you were editing.
 
You define an action that disconnects one or more connected
items from a pre-selected connection definition. This works only
for an Edit Item action. Enter:
(-clear-)
in the Value text box. This keyword removes any connected item
names, thereby clearing the connection. This keyword can be
modified to take on additional functionality, as shown below.
-- To clear a connection and then connect to the item named
ItemName, type "(-clear-) ItemName" in the Value edit box.
-- To clear a connection and then connect to the item name
passed from the specified field passed from the trigger or
condition data, type "(-clear-) (%FieldName%)" in the Value
edit box.
-- To clear a connection and then connect it to all the same items
that are connected to the named connection passed from the
trigger or condition data, type "(-clear-)
(%ConnectionName%%CategoryName%)" in the Value edit
box.
Customize-Design View-Fields Tab (Gantt Views)
Selecting the Customize-Design View command while a Gantt
chart view is the active view displays the Design View tab.
If the category contains fields called ‘Start Date’ and ‘End Date’,
Commence will automatically select these fields. If the category
has more than one set of start date and end date fields, you can
use the Fields tab to change the fields used to display the time
bar for each item.
Commence uses the fields specified for Start Date and End Date
to display a time bar indicating an item's duration. The time bar is
shown as a color-coded horizontal bar on the Gantt chart
spanning from the Start Date to the End Date.
Upon creation of a new Gantt view, the time scale is set to Auto.
An appropriate time scale for the view is determined based on the
item with the largest span of time (between the selected Start
Date and End Date).
Items in a Gantt chart view, by default, are sorted according to
their Start Dates. Items with the same Start Date are sorted by
their End Dates. Items with the same Start and End Dates are
sorted alphanumerically by their item names. This is done by
automatically setting a sort order for the Gantt chart view upon
creation of the new view. If you change the Start and End Date
fields here, be sure to change the sort order too. (See Customize-
Sort View).
Select the OK button to confirm your layout changes.
Any changes you make to the layout are temporary unless you
use Views-Save View or Views-Save View As to save the
changed view.
Select Connected Field Dialog Box
This dialog box is displayed when you select a connection
definition name from the Select Field dialog box.
 
The list box displays the fields from the category for the
connection definition you selected.
 
Highlight the field that you want to insert into your letter from the
list box. When you select the Select button, the Field Code for
the indirect field is inserted in the template. Mouse users can
double-click the left mouse button while pointing at a field to
select it without using the Select button.
 
For example, if you had selected the Has Notes/History...
connection definition in the Select Field dialog box and selected
Notes in this box, you would get the Field Code
(%Has%%Notes/History%%Notes%) in your letter.
 
If you select Cancel in the Select Connected Field dialog box
you are returned to the Select Field dialog box without making a
selection.
SQL Query Dialog Box
When you select “Advanced (using SQL)” then click the Next >
button from the Select Data Source dialog box, Commence
displays the SQL Query dialog box.
 
Advanced users may use this screen to create a SQL query to
give them more flexibility in accessing external data. Using a SQL
query allows the user to join multiple tables so that they appear
as a single table when importing into Commence. Another reason
to use a SQL query is to be able to specify the columns to be
accessed from the data source or to set a query for a subset of
the rows from the external data source. Specifying the columns or
a subset query to limit the data that is accessed will improve
performance during the import process, since less data will be
accessed from the external data source.
 
In order to properly use the Advanced dialog, users will need to
be knowledgeable of the syntax for creating proper SQL queries.
In addition, they will need to know the details of the external
database schema they are importing from, so that the proper
table names and columns can be used in the SQL query.
 
SQL QUERY:
The SQL query should be entered into the edit control on the
dialog.
QUERY STATUS:
While the query is being entered, the "Query Status" control will
display the current status, such as "editing query".
EXECUTE QUERY
After the SQL query has been completely entered, the "Execute
Query" button should be pressed to test the Query. Commence
will open a connection to the database and run the SQL query to
verify that it is correct. If the SQL query runs correctly, the status
will be updated to "query has been evaluated and is valid".
Otherwise an error message is displayed that contains error
information from the data source indicating why the SQL query
couldn't be run.
FINISH
After the SQL query has been entered, press Finish to save the
query into the import/export template.
