Visual Basic Scripting
 
Commence detail forms can be automated using Visual Basic
Scripting (VBScript). It is possible to create scripts that will guide
the user through data entry for a form. Field validation criteria can
also be defined so that newly–entered data is checked
immediately.
Commence permits VBScript code to be written for each form
within a database. This enables such operations as setting default
values, filling in fields, and navigating within the form, as well as
performing validation checks before an item is saved.
VBScript code can be written to handle various events, such as the
loading of a form, entering or leaving tabs, pressing the Save
button, etc.
While processing these events, VBScript code can read and write
field values, move the cursor to different fields and/or tabs, display
messages, abort a requested save, etc.
One benefit of this feature is faster data input, since scripts are
able to fill in field values based on other field values, or even skip
over some fields. Better data validation is achieved since the data
is now able to be checked prior to saving an item. Previously an
item would have to be edited in order to correct any invalid data
entries.
An additional benefit for users in a workgroup environment is the
significant reduction of synchronization traffic. Since values set by
VBScript code are in place prior to the Add or Edit operation, only
a single transaction needs to be distributed over the network.
Previous versions of Commence typically performed these
operations using Agents which operate after an item has been
saved. This generates additional Edit transactions which must then
also be distributed over the network.
 
See Also:
 What Is VBScript?
 What can a VBScript Do?
 
Commence VBScript Objects
Form Default object referenced by VBScript methods.
Application Commence application object used for settings that
are global to the application and all forms.
Field Object that represents a single field on the form.
Connection Object that represents a single connection on a form.
What is VBScript
 
VBScript is a programming subset of Visual Basic from Microsoft.
Originally, VBScript was developed to assist programmers in the
design of visually appealing and complex Internet home pages.
However, it has been used by programmers to develop various
applications for other software packages as well. The commands
included in VBScript are restricted to the extent that there is no
low–level programming interaction with either application software,
system hardware, or the Operating System. What this means is
that it is not possible to accidentally format the system hardware
by running script software. However, VBScript is a very powerful
tool when used to automate many "behind the scenes" processes,
such as data validation and automatically filling in known
information.
VBScript is a full–featured programming language which supports
a wide range of data types, as well as other features typical of
most programming languages in use today. This includes If - Then
- Else constructs, looping (using Do...Loop, While...Wend, and
For...Next loops), variable definitions (both scalar and array), the
definition of constants (both numeric and string), and a full range
of operators, including arithmetic, logical, comparison, and
concatenation operators.
For a complete guide to VBScript and its uses, refer to the
Microsoft Home Page, located at http://www.microsoft.com for
the latest information and support.
What Can A VBScript Do?
 
When VBScript is used to develop scripts for an application, the
application defines to VBScript the scope within which it is to
operate. VBScript is provided very specific instructions as to:
• on what it may operate (OBJECTS),
• what functionality will be available to the programmer from
within the script (METHODS), and
• under what circumstances it will be called (EVENTS).
Commence limits the available operations that are able to be
performed within a script to those that affect Detail Form
navigation, data entry, and saving of forms.
Commence VBScript Objects
 
Form Default object referenced by VBScript methods.
Application Commence application object used for settings that
are global to the application and all forms.
Field Object that represents a single field on the form.
Connection Object that represents a single connection on a form.
Form Object
Properties Methods Events
 
 
This object represents the detail form and allows access to the
tabs and fields it displays. This is also the default object that is
referenced by a script. The Form object includes properties and
methods that allow you to navigate and control Detail forms.
Form Object Properties
 
All the Form properties are read-only unless otherwise noted.
 
All properties are read-only unless otherwise noted.
 
Name
String, name of the form, ie. "Initial Form"
CategoryNameString, name of the category the form is
associated with, ie. "Person"
ItemName
String, name of the current item. May be empty
when adding an item and the name field has not
yet been entered.
TabName
String, Name of the current Tab
FieldName
String, Name of the current field (this field has
the focus)
Application
Object, this property contains the Application
object. This property can be used directly or
copied to a variable and used in a script
IsAdd
Boolean, set to TRUE if the form is displaying a
new item, else FALSE if the form is displaying an
existing item
IsShared
Boolean, set to TRUE if the item "Share" button
on the toolbar is pressed (indicating the item is
shared or will be shared after a save command).
FieldValue
VARIANT, returns the value of the current field
with the focus, usually as a string
Form Object Methods
 
MoveToTab
Switch to the tab whose name is passed as
an argument.
MoveToField
Switch to the field whose name is passed as
an argument.
 
 
SetShared
Sets the state of the "Share" button on the
detail toolbar.
 
 
Save
Saves the item displayed by the form. Subject
to errors detected by Commence, so the item
may not be saved. Will not generate a
Form_OnSave event to prevent infinite
looping.
Cancel
Cancels the item detail window and discards
any changes. Will not generate a
Form_OnCancel event to prevent infinite
looping.
Abort
Aborts the current event. Ie., if called from
Form_OnSave it will cancel the Save
operation. If called from Form_OnEnterField it
will cancel the field navigation and return the
focus to the original field.
 
 
SetValue
sets the current field’s value to the passed in
VARIANT, which is usually a string.
Field(name)
where name is a string. Gets an OLE object
(Idispatch interface) for a field object
representing the named field. On error, the
ERR object will be set with ‘invalid arg’ error
code.
Connection(name,
ToCategory)
where name and ToCategory are strings.
Gets an OLE object for a connection object
representing the named connection. On error,
the ERR object will be set with ‘invalid arg’
error code.
Form Object Events
 
Form_OnLoad
Occurs when the detail form is
opened.
Form_OnSave
Occurs when the detail form is
saved
From_OnCancel
Occurs when the detail form
cancelled (not saved)
Form_OnEnterTab
Occurs when a detail form tab is
opened
Form_OnLeaveTab Occurs when leaving a detail
form tab.
Form_OnEnterField Occurs when the focus moves
into a field.
Form_OnLeaveFieldOccurs when the focus leaves a
field
Application Object
 Properties Methods
 
 
Represents the Commence application. The Application object
allows access to settings that are valid for Commence as well as
all forms.
Application Object Properties
 
This object represents the Commence application and allows
access to settings that are valid for the application and all forms.
 
All properties are read-only unless otherwise noted.
CurrentScriptLevel
Number, contains the script level set by the
script. To change the script level (which
controls the VBScript objects supported by
Commence), assign the desired level to this
property. The level must be greater than 0
and less than or equal to DefaultScriptLevel
Database
Accesses the Database API for managing
other Commence items
DatabaseDirectory String, DOS path of the active Commence
database, ie., "c:\commence\data\"
DatabaseName
String, Name of the active Commence
database, ie., "Main Database"
DefaultScriptLevel Number, contains the maximum script level
supported by this version of Commence
Name
String, application name, usually
"Commence"
ProgramDirectory String, Commence program directory, often
"c:\commence"
ProgramName
String, Commence .exe file name, often
"c:\commence\commence.exe"
Application Object Methods
 
 
GetVersion
returns the Commence version number
in the form "4.1.x.y"
IsScriptLevelSupported
returns 1 if the passed in script level is
supported, else returns 0 if it is not
supported
Field Object
 Properties
 
 
Represents the Commence field. The Field object allows access to
settings that are valid for Commence as well as all forms.
Field Object Properties
 
This object represents a single field value from the item displayed
by the form object.
 
All properties are read-only unless otherwise noted.
Name
String, field name
Label
String, field’s label on the current form tab
Value
VARIANT; contains number for number and calculation
fields, string for most other fields. This property can be
read and set; check the Err object for any errors on
setting a field value. Note: Image fields are not supported
in this release.
Connection Object
 Properties Methods
 
This object represents a connection field displayed by the form
object. The state represented by this object is consistent with the
state of the connection field as it is displayed on the form. If the
connection has a filter and it is currently in effect, the object will
return values consistent with the filtered items displayed by the
connection. If there is no filter or if it has been turned off, then this
object will return values consistent with no applied filter.
Connection Properties
 
All properties are read-only unless otherwise noted.
Name
String, connection name, e.g. "Attends"
ToCategory
String, name of the connected ‘To’
category, e.g., "Appointment"
ConnectedItemCount
Number; count of connected items in this
connection; takes into account the current
state of the connection’s filter
CurrentSelection;
Number; read-write property; index of
connected item that is selected for use
with this object’s methods; reading this
property will return the currently selected
item; to select a different connected item,
assign its 1-based index to this property. If
there are no connected items, this
property is initialized to 0, otherwise it is
initialized to 1 (representing the first
connected item)
ItemName
String; name field of the selected item, if
any
ItemClarifyField
String; clarify field of the selected item, if
any
Connection Methods
 
 
Clear()
Disconnects all connected items
that meet the connection filter. If
no filter is defined (via Customize-
Database-Connection-Advanced)
then it functions the same as
ClearAll().
ClearAll()
Disconnects all connected items
regardless of the connection filter
ClearConnection(ItemName,
Clarify)
Disconnects a single, specific item
identified by the ItemName and
Clarify strings. Note that the "(-
Me-)" keyword can be used for the
ItemName parameter.
SetConnection(ItemName,
Clarify)
Connects the item displayed on
the form to a single, specific item
identified by the ItemName and
Clarify strings. Note that the "(-
Me-)" keyword can be used for the
ItemName parameter.
FieldValue(FieldName);
VARIANT; gets the field value for
the named field in the selected,
connected item. See description of
the Value property for Field
objects.
